Adi Parva

Section 1 

(ANUKRAMAN1KA PARVA.) 

Having saluted the Supreme Deity (Narayana),
and the highest of all male beings (Nara) 
and also the Goddess of Learning (Saraswati), let
us cry success!
One day when the great sages of 
hard austerities, who had been present at 
the twelve years' sacrifice of Kulapati 
Saanaka, were comfortably sitting in the 
Naimisharanya, Rishi Lomharshana’s son, 
Ugrasrava, popularly known as Sauti,—well- 
read in the Puranas, —came to them with 
all humility. 

(Thereupon) desirous of hearing his 
wonderful stories, the ascetics addressed him 
who had come to their hermitage of Naimisharanya.

 Having been welcomed with due 
respect by those holy Rishis, Sauti, with 
joined hands, asked them all how their 
devout penances were progressing. 

 After the Rishis had taken their seats, 
Lomharshana’s son humbly took the seat 
assigned to him. 

 Seeing that he had been comfortably 
seated and observing that he had had some 
rest after the fatigue, one of the Rishis 
started the conversation, saying, 

 “ O Lotus-eyed, whence have you 
come ? Where have you been, Sauti ? 
Tell me, I ask you, (all the particulars of 
your travels).” 

 When the accomplished speaker Sauti 
was thus questioned, he gave before that 
creat assembly of contemplative Rishis a 
full and proper reply in words becoming 
their nature. 

Sauti said 

 “After listening to the various 
revered and wonderful stories of the Mahabharata composed by Krishna Dwaipavana, 
—those that were fully recited by Vaishampayana at the great snake-sifcrifice held 
by that noble-heartedroyal sage, the prince of princes, the son of Parikshit, Janamejaya.

 (O holy Rishis) I wandered about and visited 
many holy shrines and sacred waters and came to Samantapanchaka, a place venerated by the twice- 
born, 

 And where in the days of yore the 
sons of Kuru and Pandu had fought a deadly 
battle, in which all the Chiefs of India joined 
one side or the other. 

 Being anxious to see you (all), 

I have now come before your (august) presence. O Revered Sages, to you who are 
all to me as Brahma, to you who are greatly 
learned and highly blessed, who shine with 
the fire of the Sun in this holy place of 
sacrifice, who are pure by sacred ablutions, 
who have performed and' finished the deep 
meditation, who have kept up the sacrificial
fire, who are beyond all cares to you, O 
twice-born ones, what shall I speak 

 Shall I repeat to you the sacred 
stories of the Puranas, bearirtg on religious 
precepts and wordly profit,—or shall I 
recount to you the wonderful deeds of the 
great sages and saints and the sovereigns of 
mankind ?” 

The Rishis replied 

 The Purana which was first told by 
the illustrious sage, Dwaipayana, and which 
was greatly esteemed by the celestials and 
Bramharsis when they heard it, 

 And which, being full of various dictions and divisions, is (undoubtedly) the most 
eminent narrative (amongst all narratives) 
that exist, containing (as it does) subtle and 
logically combined meanings, enriched with 
(the essences of) the Vedas, is a sacred 
work. 

 It is composed in beautiful language, and it includes all other works. It is 
explained by all Sastras, and contains the^ 
sense of the four Vedas. (But Sauti,) we 
desire to hear Bharata t the sacred history 
that drives away all fear,—the holy cont¬ 
ortion of great. Vyasa,—just as it was 
cautifully narrated at the great snake- 
sacrificc of Raja Janamejaya by Rishi 
Vaishampayana as directed Gy Krishna 
Dwaipayana himself.


Sauti then said 

22 . Bowing my head to the first being Ishan, who is adored by all and to whom all make offerings, who is the true unchangeable-One who is manifested and unmanifested, eternal and everlasting Brahma, 

23. VVho is both non-existing and existing- 
who is the (existing) universe, 
and still distinct from both the existing and 
the non-existing world, who is the originator 
of all, both high and low, 

24. Who is the ancient, great, undecaying 
One,—who is Vishnu, the good and the 
goodness, who is worthy of all worship, pure 
and sinless, who is Hari, the lord of the 
faculties, the guide of all the moveable and 
the immoveable, 

25. I shall now describe to 
you the holy thoughts of the great Rishi of the wonderful deeds of Vyasa who is worshipped by all of you here.

26. Some bards have already sung this istory and some again are teaching it to others.

27. It is a great source of knowledge all through the three worlds. It is possessed by the twice-born, both in detailed and compedious form.

28. It is embellished with elegant expressions, with human and divine conversations, and with various political measures. It is therefore, the great delight of the learned.

29. In this Universe, when there was no brightness and no light, and when all was enveloped in darkness, there came into being a mighty egg, the one inexhaustible seed of all created beings.

30—31. It is called Mahadivya , and was 
created at the beginning of the Yuga. In it existed the true Light, Brahma, the eternal One, wonderful and inconceivable, omnipresent, invisible and subtle cause.

32. From this egg was born the lord Pitamaha Brahma
the only one Prajapati with Suraguru and Sthanu.


33. With Manu, Ka and Parameshti with 
Procheta and Daksha, and the seven sons 
of Daksha

34. Then also appeared twenty one Prajapatis
and the man of inconceivable 
nature.-whom all the Rishis know. Then came Adityas, Vasus, Ashwins.

35. The Yakshas, Sadhyas, Pitris, Guhyakas then appeared.

36. Then they produced the wise and holy Brahmarshis and numerous Rajarshis, distinguished for every noble quality, then the water, heavens, the earth, the air, the sky and the points of the heavens.

37. The years, the seasons, the months, 
the fortnights, and the day and night in 
succession. 

38. And again, at the end of the world 
and of the Yuga, whatever is seen in the 
universe, all created things,—both animate and 
inanimate,—will be turned into chaos. 

39. And at the beginning of other (new
Yagas , all things will be again produced ; 
and like the various fruits of the earth will 
succeed on© another in the due order of their 
seasons. 

40. This mysterious wheel, which cause 
the destruction and production of all things, 
revolves thus perpetually in the world, without 
beginning and without an end. 

41. To cite a brief example,—The 
generation of Devos, was thirty three thousand, 
thirty three hundred and thirty three. 

42. The sons of Div were Brihadbhamis 
Chakshus, Atma, Vibhavasu, Savita, Ri- 
chika, Arka, Bhanu, Ashabaha, and Ravi. 

43. Of these Vivaswans of old Mahya was 
the youngest whose son was Devabrata. 

44. Devabrata had one son, named 
Subrata who had three sons, namely 
Dasajyoti, Satajyoti, and Sahasrajyoti, each of 
whom gave birth to innumerable offsprings. 

45 — 46. Famous Dasajyoti had ten 
thousands, Satajyoti had ten times that 
number,  and Sahasrajyoti, ten times the 
number of the offsprings of Satajyoti. 

47. From them descended the race of the 
Kurus , Yndus and Bharat a, and also that of 
Yajati and Ikshwaku and all the Rajarshis. There were also produced numerous 
other generations, 

48. And innumerable creatures and their 
abodes. There were produced the three¬ 
fold Mysteries, the Vedas , Yoga and  
Vijnana ;— Dharma, Artha and Kama.

49. The various books on Dharma , Artha , 
and Kama ; the rules for the conduct of 
mankind, 

50. The histories and discourses and various smritis. These are the signs of this 
work (Mahabharata). 

51. All this, having been seen by Rishi 
Vyasa is mentioned hero in due order as a 
specimen of the book. 

52. Rishi Vyasa declared this mass of knowledge in both abridged and detailed forms. The learned of the world wish to possess bith the detailed and 
abridged accounts.

53. Some read the Bharata from the first 
Mantra , some from the story of Astika, some 
again from Uparichara , while some Brahmanas read tne whole. 

54. Learned men display their various 
knowledge of Smritis in commenting on this 
composition. Some are skilful in explaining 
it, while others in remembering it. 

55. The son of Satyavati (Vyasa) by 
penances and meditation, having classified 
the ever-lasting Veda, composed this holy 
history. 

56. When the learned and the strict - 
vowed Brahmarshi, Dwaipayana Vyasa, 
the son of Parasara, completed this greatest 
of narrations, be began tg consider now be 
could teach it to his pupils. 

57. Then did the Preceptor of the world, 
the possessor of the six attributes, Brahma, 
knowing the anxiety of Rishi Dwaipayaat, 
come in person to the place where the Rishi 
was, so that he might gratify the Saint and 
benefit the people. 

58. When Vyasa, who was surrounded by 
all the classes of Munis, saw him, he was 
much surprised. Standing with his joined 
hands, lie bowed at his feet aid ordered a 
seat to be brought. 

59. Then going round to the side of the 
distinguished seat on which sat Hiranya- 
garva, he stood near it. 

6 0. Bat being commanded by Parameshti, 
Brahma,. full of love, he sat down near the 
seat, smiling in joy. 

61. Then addressing Brahma, the greatly 
glorious Vyasa thus said :—“ O Divine 
Brahma, a poem, which is greatly respected* 
has been composed by me. 

62. (It contains) the mystery of the Vedas 
and other subjects that have been explained 
by me; (it contains) the various hymns of 
the Vedas, Upanishadas with their Angas, 

63. And a compilation of the Puranas, and 
the history which has been composed by me 
and named after the three divisions of time, 
namely, Past, Present and Future. 

64. And it contains the nature of decay, 
death, fear, disease, existence and non
existence; a description of creeds, and thp 
account of various modes of life. 

65. And it also contains the rples for the 
four castes and the essence of all the Puranas, 
an account of asceticism, and rules for the  
religious student, the dimensions of the earth 
of the sun and moon, 

66 . Planets, stars and Constellations and 
the length of the duration of the four yugas and it further more contains Rik, Sama, Yajur vedas and adhyatma.

67. Naya, ortheopy and pathology 
Charity, Pashupata, and celestial and human 
births for particular purposes.

68. It contains descriptions of holy places, pilgrimages, rivers and mountains, forests, seas. 

69. Of celestial cities, and of the Kalpas; 
the art of war, - different kinds of nations, 
and the languages and numbers of the 
people.

70. All this has been placed in this poem, 
but a writer fqr this is not be found
on earth.

Brahma said:— 

71. For your knowledge of the Divine
Mystery, I have the highest regard for you 
amongst all the celebrated Rishis, who are 
famous for their holy lives.

72. I know, you have revealed in the 
language of truth the divine words even from 
the first of them. You have called your present work 
a poem. Why?

73. There will be no poets in this world 
whose works will equal this poem,as the 
three other Asramas are never equal to the 
domestic Asrama.

74. Let Ganesha he remembered, O Rishi, 
to write "this poem." 
Sauti said:

Having thus spoken to Vyasa, Brahma went away.

75— 76 Then began Vyasa to remember 
Ganesha in his mind. As soon he was
thought of, the expeller of obstacles Ganesha
who is always ready to fulfil the desires of his 
worshippers, came to the place where 
Vyasa was seated. 

77. When he was saluted and when he took 
Ms seat, Vyasa thus addressed him, O guide 
of the Ganas, kindly become the writer 
of the Bharata, which 1 baVe composed in my 
mind, but which I shall now repeat." 

78. On hearing this, Ganesha thus 
replied I shall become the writer of your 
work, provided my pen is not made-to stop 
even for a moment.

79. And Vyasa told him, Stop-Writing 
only when youy will not be able to understand a 
passage." Ganesha assented, by saying 
Om.  He proceeded to write and Vyasa 
began to dictate. 

80. To lake time to rest, Vyasa sometimes 
knit the knofs of composition very close. 
Thus he went on dictating his work as he 
made engagement. 

Sauti continued- 

81—82. I know eight thousand eight 
hundred versed, so does Shuka and perhaps Sanjaya.
O munis, none is able to understand to
this day those closely knit Shlokas for the 
mysteriousness of their meaning. 

83. Even all-knowing Ganesha had to 
take time to think (over their meaning), 
while Vyasa continued to compose other 
versos in great numbers. 

84. The wisdom of this work, like the stick 
used for applying ceUyrium, has opened the 
eyes of the world which were covered by the 
darkness of ignorance. 

85. As the sun drives away the darkness, 
so does this Bkarat a , by its discourses on 
Dharma, Artka, Kama and Moksha, drive 
the ignorance of men. 

86. As the Full-Moon with its mild light 
opens the buds of the water-lily, so does 
this Parana with the light of Sruti expand 
the human intellect. 

87. The whole house of the womb of 
nature is properly and completely lighted by 
the lamp of history which destroys the dark¬ 
ness of ignorance. 

88. This work is a tree, the chapter of 
contents is its seed, the divisions Paulama 
and Astika are its roots, the Sambkava is its 
trunk, the books (Parva) Sava and Aranya 
are the roosting perches, Arani is the knitting 
knot, 

89— 90. Virata and Udyoga the pith, 
Bhisma the main branch, Drona the leaves, 
Kama its beautiful flowers, Sailya their 
fragrance, Stri and Aishika are its cooling 
shades, Santi its great fruit, 

91. Ashwamidha ts its immortal sap, 
Asramavasika the place where it crows, and 
Mausula is the epitome of the Vedas. 

$ 3 . This tree will be highly respected by 
all virtuous Brahmans. This tree of Bharata 
will be as inexhaustible as the clouds and be 
the means of livelihood of many illustrious 
poets. 

Sauti continued 

93. I shall speak to you about the ever¬ 
lasting, fruitful and flowery productions of 
this true. They are of pleasant and pure 
taste, and they are to be tasted even by 
immortals. 

94. Requested by his own mother and the 
the son of Ganga, Bhisma, the mighty and 
holy Krishna Dwaipayana became the 
father of throe sons, who were like three fires, 
by the two wives of Vichitravirya. 

95. Having thus begotten Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, he returned to 
his hermitage to prosecute this religious 
studies. 

96. The great Rishi Vyasa did not publish 
this Bharata to the world of mankind until 
his sons were born, grown up and (died) 
(went on the supreme journey). 

97. When be was earnestly solicited by 
Janamejaya and thousands of Brahmanas, he 
taught it to his disciple Vaishampayana. 

98. Vaishampayana, sitting together with 
his comrades, recited the Bharata at the intervals of the Sacrifice, and he was repeatedly 
asked to proceed when he stopped. 

99. Vyasa has fully described the greatness 
of the Kuru race, virtues of Gandhari, 
the wisdom of Vidura and constancy of 
Kunti. 

100. He has also described the divinity  
of Vasudeva (Krishna), the goodness of the 
sons of Pandu, and the evil conduct of the 
sons of Dhritarastra. 

101. Vyasa originally compiled the Bharata 
exclusive of episodes, in twenty-four thousand 
verses, and this much only is called by the 
learned as the real Bharata . 

102. He subsequently composed an epitome
in one hundred and fifty verses,— 
an index of the chapters of contents. 

103. He first taught this epitome to his 
son Suka, and then to others of his disciples 
who had the same qualifications. 

104. He then completed another 
compilation, consisting of six hundred thousand 
slokas. Of these, thirty hundred thousands , 
are known in the world of Devas, 

105. Fifteen hundred thousands in the 
world of Pitris, fourteen hundred thousands 
in the world of Gandharvas, and one hundred  
thousands in the world of mankind. 

106. Narada recited them to the Devas 
Devala to Pitris, and Suka to the Gandharvas, 
Yakshas and Raluhas. 

107. One of the pupils of Vyasa, Vaisham¬ 
payana, a man of just principles, the first 
amongst the learned in the Vedas, recited them 
in this world of mankind. Know, I (Sauti) 
have also recited one hundred thousand - 
verses of this great work. 

108. Duryodhana is a great tree created
out of passion, Karna is its trunk ; Sakuni 
is its branches ; Dushasana is its fruit and 
flowers, and weak Dhritarastra is its root. 

109. Yudhisthira is a great tree, created 
out of virtue and religion ; Atjuna is its trunk ; 
Bhima is its branches ; two sons of Madri 
are its flowers and fruits; and Krishna, 
Brahma, and Brahmans are its roots. 

110. Pandu, after conquering many 
countries by his valour and wisdom, retired 
into a forest and took up his abode with the 
Rishis. 

111, As a sportsman he brought upon 
himself a very great misfortune by killing a 
Stag when it was with its mate. Pandu’s 
misfortune served as a warning for the 
eonduet of all the princes of his house as long 
as they lived, 
 
112. His two wives, (Kunti and Madri), 
according’ to the ordinance of the Sastras, 
admitted to their embraces the celestials, 
Vharma, Vayu , Sahra and two Aswinas, so 
that the race of Pandu might not be extinct. 

113—114. When these offsprings of the 
celestials were grown up under the care of 
their two mothers, and in the society of holy 
Rishis, in the midst of sacred groves and in 
the holy hermitage, they were taken by the 
Rishis into the presence of Dhritarashtra and 
his sons. They followed them in the garb of 
Brahmacharis, and as students ; their hairs 
were tied in knots on their heads. 

115. Our these pupils,” said they, " are 
your sons, your brothers and your friends. 
They are the Pandavas.” So saying they 
went away. 

116. When the Kuru people saw that 
they were introduced by Rishis as the sons 
of Pandu, the higher class amongst them 
loudly shouted with joy. 

117. Some, however, said they were not 
the sons of Pandu ; others said they were. 
Some said how they could be the sons of 
Pandu who was dead long ago. 

118. Voices, however, were heard from 
all sides, crying, They are welcome. 
Through divine providence, we see before 
the sons of Pandu. Let their welcome be 
proclaimed.’  

119—120. When the acclamations of the 
people ceased, tremendous plaudits of 
invisible spirits were heard, echoing every point 
of the heavens. Showers of fragrant 
flowers fell, and conches and kettle-drums 
were sounded. Such wonders happened 
when the princes arrived. 

121. The joyous cry, of the citizens in 
expression of their pleasure for the happy 
event, was so great that it reached the very 
heavens. 

122. Without any apprehension from any 
one, and much respected by all the people, the 
Pandavas lived there, having studied the 
whole of the Vedas and various other Sastras. 

123. The chief men of the city were 
highly pleased with the purity of Yudhishthira, 
the strength of Bhima, the gallantry of 
Arjuna, 

 124. The submissiveness of Kunti to all 
her superiors, and the humility of Nakula and 
Sahadeva. All other people were rejoiced to 
see their heroism. 

125. A few years after, Ariuna, after 
performing a difficult feat of archery obtained 
the hands of Draupadi at the Swayamvara in 
the midst of a great assemblage of kings 
and princes. 

126. From that day he was very much 
respected by all men as a great bow-man. 
Like the strut he appeared in the field of 
battle, and was difficult to be beheld by 
enemies. 

127. He defeated all the neighbouring
potentates and chief tribes, and thus 
accomplished all that was necessary for the 
king (Yudhishthira) to perform the great Raj- 
sttya Sacrifice. 

128—129. After killing Jarasandha, proud 
of his powers through the wise counsel of 
Krishna and by the prowess of Bhima and 
Arjuna, Yudhishthira acquired the right to 
perform the Rajsouya Sacrifice, which 
abounded in provisions and offerings and 
was full of transcendent merits. 

130—32. Duryodhana came to this 
sacrifice. When he saw on all sides the great 
wealth of the Pandavas,—the offerings, the 
precious stones, gold and jewels, elephants 
and horses ; valuable textures, garments and 
mantles ; shawls and furs, carpets made of 
the skin of the Rankava,—he was filled with 
envy, and became very angry. 

133. When he saw the hall of assembly, 
beautifully constructed by Moya after the 
celestial Court, he became exceedingly sorry. 

134. (To chagrin him more) when he 
was contused at certain architectural 
deceptions, Bhiqia sneered at him, before Vasu- 
deva, saying he was of low birth. 

135-.lt was represented to Dhritarashtra 
that his son, notwithstanding he was 
partaking various objects of enjoyments and 
valuable things, was becoming pale, lean 
and meagre. 

136. Out of affection for him the blind 
king gave his son permisson to play at dice 
(with the Pandavas). When Krishna came 
to know this, he became very angry. 

137. And being displeased, he did nothing 
to stop the dispute, but overlooked the 
fatal game and other horrible unjust deeds 
that were the result of it. 

138. In spite of Bhishma, Drona, Vidura 
and the son of Sardwan, Kripa, he made the 
Kskatryas kill one another in the great 
battle that followed. 

139- (At the end of the battle)  
Dhritarashtra, hearing the news of the Pundavas' 
success, and recollecting the vows that 
Duryodhana, Karna and Sukani had taken, 

140. thought for a while and addressed 
Sanjaya thus :— Listen to me, O Sanjaya, 
listen to all I am now about to say. You 
will then find it is not fit to treat me with 
contempt. 

141. You are learned in Sastras, you 
are intelligent, and you arc possessed of 
wisdom. (Hear), my inclinations were 
never for war, nor did I feel pleasure in the 
destruction of my race. 

142. I felt no difference between my sons 
and the sons of Pandu 

143. My own sons were way word, and 
they hated me, because I was old and blind 
I bore all on account of my miserable state, 
and for paternal affection. I was foolish and 
thoughtless, and Duryodhana grew in folly. 

144. My own son was a spectator of the 
great wealth of the powerful sons of Panda, 
and was sneered at for his awkwardness in 
entering into the hall. 

145-46. Being unwilling to bear all this, 
and at the same time being incapable of 
vanquishing the Pandavas m the field, he 
planned a most unjust game at dice, instead 
of being willing to obtain fortune by his 
own exertion and with the help of the king of 
Gandhara. 

147. Hear, O Sanjaya, all that happened 
afterwards and all that came to my knowledge.
When you hear all that I say, 
recollecting everything, you will then know 
me to be a man having prophetic eyes. 

148. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Arjuna, having bent the 
bow, had pierced the mark, and brought 
it to the ground, and, had guarded the 
princess Krishna in the preserve of the 
assembled chiefs and potentates. 

149. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Subhadra of the Madhu race had been forcibly carried away by 
Afjuna, and had been subsequently married 
by him in the city of Dwarka, and the two 
heroes of the Vrishni race, instead of being 
angry, had come to Indraprasta as friends. 

150. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya,
when. I heard that Arjuna had satisfied 
Agni by giving him the forest of 
Khandava, preventing at the same time by his 
celestial arrows the downpour made by 
Indra, the king of the celestials. 

151. I had no hope of success, 
O Sanjaya, when 1 heard that the five Pandavas 
with their mother Kunti had escaped from 
the house of lac, and that Vi<Jura had helped 
them in their escape. 

152. 1 had ho hope of success, 
O Sanjaya, when 1 heard that Arjuna had obtained 
the hands of Draupadi by piercing the 
mark and the brave Panchalas had joined 
the Pandavas. 

153. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the foremost king 
Of the Maghada dynasty, the shining 
staf of all the Kshatriyas Jarasandha had 
been killed by Bhima alone with his bare 
arms. 

154. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the sons of Pandu had 
conquered all the chiefs and potentates  
a general campaign, and had celebrated the 
victory by the performance of the grand 
sacrifice of Rajtuya, 


155. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that weeping and sorrowing, 
Drautoadi, in the season of her impuritvy 
had been dragged into court with but one 
cloth on, and treated as if she had none in this 
world, though she had her protectors. 

156. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the wicked wretch 
Dusyasana had been able to drag out only a 
heap of clothes without finding its end when 
he had attempted to strip her of her single 
cloth. 

157. I hid no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Yudhishthira had 
been defeated by Saubala at dice and 
had been deprived of his kingdom as its 
resqlt, but still he was attended by his powerful
brothers. 

158. I lmd no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the four Pandava 
brothers, weeping in sorrow, had followed their 
eldest brother and had tried every means to 
mitigate his discomfort. 

159. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Yudhishthira had been 
followed into wilderness by Snatakas and by 
holy Brahmanas. 

160. 1 had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that, Arjuna, after pleasing 
in combat the god of gods, the three- 
eyed Siva Who appeared before him in the 
guise of a hunter, had obtained the great 
weapon pashupat . 

161. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the just and famous 
Arjuna had gone to the land of the 
celestials and had there obtained celestial weapons 
from Indra, the king of the gods. 

162. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Arjuna had then defeated 
the Kalakeyas and the Paulamas who were 
proud of the boon they had received from 
Shiva, and through which they had been 
unconquerable even by celestials. 

163. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the chastiser o£ foes, 
Arjuna, had gone to the land of Indra to kill 
the Asuras and had come back successfully. 

164. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Bhima and other sons of 
Kunti, accompanied by Vaisravana, had 
come to that country which was inaccessible 
by‘nfen. 

165. 1 had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when 1 heard that my sons were taken 
prisoners by the gandharvas on their journey but
were rescued by Arjuna, 

166. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya. 
when I heard that Dharma came in the 
guise of a Yaksha and asked some questions to Yudhishthira.

167. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that my sons had failed to ( 
discover the Pandavas when they lived in 
disguise with Draupadi in the kingdom of 
Virata. 

168. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that all the chief warriors of 
my side had been defeated by Arjuna on a 
single chariot while he was in the kingdom 
of Virata. 

169. 1 had no hope of success, O Sanjaya 
when I heard that the king of Matsa (Virata) 
had offered his virtuous daughter Uttara to 
Arjuna, and Arjuna had accepted her for 
his son Avimanyu. 

170. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya
when I heard that Yudhishthira, who was 
defeated at dice and deprived of his wealth, 
who was exiled and separated from his 
relatives and friends, had collected an army 
of seven Akshaithrfiis . 

171. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya
when I heard that Vasudeva of the Madhu 
race, who covered the whole universe with 
his but one foot, had been heartily engaged 
to do good to the Pandavas. 

172. I had no hope of success, O Sanjayat 
when I heard that Narada declared that 
Krishna and Arjuna are Nara and Nara - 
van: 1, and they had been seen together in 
the region of Brahma. 

173. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that being anxious to bring 
about peace for the welfare of mankind, 
Krishna had come to the Kurus, but had 
gone away being unsuccessful in his mission. 

174. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Karna and Duryodhana had 
determined to make Krishna a prisoner, but 
he had shown the whole universe in himself. 

175. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when i heard that Kunti had received con¬ 
solation from him when she stood near his 
car, weeping in sorrow. 

176. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Vasudeva and .San- 
tanu’s son Bhishma were their advisers and 
Bharadwaya’s son Drona had pronounced 
blessings on them. 

.177. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Karna had said to 
Bhishma, ' I will not fight when you fight,” 
and so saying had gone away. 

178. 1 had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Vasudeva, Arjuna and 
powerful Gandivd, these three of feajrfuJ 
energy, had come together. ‘ 

179 1 fnid no hppe of success,' O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Krishna had shown 
Arjuna all the worlds within himself when 
he, full of pity, sank down upon his chariot, 

180. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when 1 heard that the great destroyer of foes, 
Bhishma, killing ten thousand car-warriors 
every day, had not killed any Pundava hero 
of note. 

181. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the virtuous son of Ganga, 
great Bhishma, had himself told the enemies 
of the means of his own death, and it had 
been joyfully adopted by the Pandavas. t 

1S2. I had no hope oif success, O Saniaya, 
when I heard that Arjuna, having placed 
Shikhandin before him on his chariot, had 
wounded the infinitely courageous and the 
unconquerable Bhishma. 

183. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that, after reducing the Shoma- 
kas to a few, the old hero Bhishma had been 
overcome with innumerable wounds and was 
lying on arrows. 

184. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya 
when 1 heard that living been requested, 
Arjuna, piercing the ground, had allayed the 
thirst of Bhishma when bo very much longed 
for water. 

185. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya
when I heard that Vayu , with Indra and 
Surya , had united in alliance for the success 
of the Pandavas, and even the beasts of prey 
were putting us to fear. 

186. 1 had no hope of success, O Sanjaya 
when I heard that Drona, though he displayed 
many inodes of fight, had not killed any of 
the chief Pandavas. 

187. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the mighty car-warriors 
Sansaptakas, appointed to defeat Arjuna, had 
been all killed by him. 

188. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya 
 when I heard that Subhadra’s brave 
son had singly penetrated into our Vyuha , 
impenetrable by others and defended by 
well-armed Drona himself. 

189. 1 had no hope of success. O San¬ 
jaya. when I heard that our great car-warriors, 
being unable to defeat Arjuna, had enjoyed 
joy after jointly' surrounded and slain the 
boy Abhimanyu. 

190. I had no hope of success, O San¬ 
jaya, when I heard that the blind Kauravas 
were shouting with joy for killing Abhi¬ 
manyu, and that Arjuna had taken his 
celebrated vow about Saindhava. 

191. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya
, when 1 heard that Arjuna had taken 
the vow of killing Saindhava, and he had 
fulfilled his vow in the presence of his 
relatives. 

192. 1 had no hope of success O Sanjaya, 
when 1 heard that Vasudeva, finding the 
horses of Arjuna fatigued, unyoked them 
in the the field of battle, gave them water to 
drink, and re-yoking them, drove the chariot 
as before. 

193. I had no hope of success, O San- 
iaya, when I heard that Arjuna had kept 
back all his assailants when his horses were 
taken away for drink. 

194. I had no hope of success, O San- 
iaya, when 1 heard tnat Yuyudhana of the 
Vrisni race went back to the place where 
Krishna and Arjuna were, after having 
thrown the army of Drona into disorder, 
having none to withstand the attack on 
account of powerful elephants. 

195. I had no hope of success, O San¬ 
jaya, when I heard that Karna, having got 
Bhima in his power, had allowed him to 
escape only with some contemptuous terms 
and having dragged him with the end of 
his bow. 


196. I had no hope of success, O San¬ 
jaya, when I heard that Drona, Kritavanna, 
Kripa, Karna, Ashwathatna and Sallya 
had allowed Saindhava to be killed before 
their presence. 

197. I had no hope of success, O San- 
jaya, when I heard that through the machina¬ 
tions of Krishna, the celestial weapon Sakti, 
given to Karna by Indra, had been hurled 
against Ghatatkacha of a dreadful face. 

19 57 I had no hope of success, O San¬ 
jaya, when I heard that in the fight between 
Karna and Ghatatkacha, the Sakti had been 
hurled against Ghatatkacha by Karna, the 
weapon which should have certainly killed 
Arjuna. 

199. I had no hope of success, O San- 
jaya, when I heard that Dhristadyumna, 
violating all the rules of war, had killed 
Drona while insensible on his chariot and 
bent on death. 


200. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Nakula, the son of Madri, 
had driven the chariot of the son of Drona all 
around the place, having engaged with him 
in a single combat before the whole army 
and proving himself fully equal to him. 


201. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Drona's son had misused 
the weapon, named Narayana and had fail¬ 
ed to kill the Pandavas. 


202. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Bhima had drunk the 
blood of his cousin Dushasana and none was 
able to prevent him. 

203. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when t heard that the exceedingly brave, and 
unconquerable in war, Karna had been killed 
by Arjuna in the war of brothers, which was 
mysterious even to celestials, 


204. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Yudhishthira had defeated 
the son of Drona, Dushasana and fearful 
Kritavarma. 

205. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Judhisthira had killed the 
king of Madra, who always challenged 
Krishna. 

206. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Suvala, the man of magic 
power and the root of the gaining and the 
feud, had been killed by Sahadeva. 

207. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Duryodhana, having been 
spent with fatigue, his strength being gone 
out and without even a chariot, had gone to 
a lake and had taken refuge in its waters. 

208. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the Pandavas accompani¬ 
ed by Krishna had gone to that lake ana had 
begun to address my son contemptuously, 
who was never able to put up with any 
affront. 

209. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that while displaying various 
modes of attack and defence in a aub-fight, 
he had been unjustly slain through the 
counsels of Krishna. 

2to. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that the sons of Drona and 
others had committed a horrible and infa¬ 
mous deed by killing the Panchalas and the 
sons of Draupadi in their sleep. 

211. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that Ashwathama, having, 
been pursued by Bhima, had discharged 
the greatest'of weapons, named Aishika, by 
which the son in the womb of Uttara was 
wounded. 

212. I had no hope of success, O Sanjaya 
when I heard the weapon Brahmasira , dis¬ 
charged by Ashwathama, had been repelled 
by Arjuna with another weapon, on which he 
had uttered the word Sasti, and that Ashwa- 
thama had to surrender the Jewel that was on 
his head. 

213. 1 had no hope of success, O Sanjaya, 
when I heard that for wounding the son in 
the womb of Uttara both Krishna and Dai- 
payana had cursed him. 

214. Alas! Ghandhari is to be pitied ! 
She has lost all her children, grand children, 
parents, brothers, and kindred. A most 
difficult work has been performed by the 
Pandavas. A kingdom has been gained by 
them without a rival. 

215. Alas! I have heard that only ten 
persons are alive in this war on our side 
and seven on the side of the Pandavas. 
Eleven Akshanhtnts of Kshatriyas Iiayo 
been slain in this fearful battle, 


216. Utter darkness is all around me, a 
faintness comes over me. O Suta, conscious 
ness is leaving me, my mind is distracted. 

Sauti said :

217. Bewailing his fate thus, Dhritarashtra 
was overcome with the greatest sorrow, and 
lost his senses for a time. But being revived, 
he addressed Sanjaya in these words. 

Dhritarashtra said 

218. After what has happened, O Sanjaya, 
I desire to abandon this life without any 
further delay. I do not see any good by 
keeping it alive any longer. 

Sauti  said 

219. While thus talking and bewailing, 
sighing like a serpent and fainting every 
moment, the wise son of Gavalgana (Sanjaya) 
addressed the pitiable king of the earth in 
words instinct with deep meaning. 

Sanjaya said 

220. From wise Narada and Vyasayou 
have heard, O King, of immensely powerful 
men, men of great exertions, 

221. Men born of great royal dynasties, 
men full of great qualities, men well-versed 
in the art of using celestial weapons, 

222-223. Men who, having conquered 
the world by righteous war and performing 
sacrifices with proper offerings, obtained fame 
in this world and finally succumbed to death 

224-227. Such men were Saivya, the 
brave car-warrior Srinjaya, the great 
amongst all conquerors buhatra, Rantideva, 
Kakshivanta, greatly glorious Damana, 
Valhaka, Sarjati, Ajita, Nala, Vishyamitra, 
the killer of enemies, the greatly strong 
Amvarisha, Maruta, Manu, Ikshwaku, 
Goya, Bharata, Parushurama, the son of 
Dasharatha Rama, Sashabindu, Bha- 
giratha, Krityavirja, Janamejaya, and 
Yayati of good deeds, who performed sacri¬ 
fices, assisted by the celestials themselves, 
and by whose sacrificial altars and stakes the 
habitable and inhabitable regions of this 
earth were all over marked. 

When Saivya was much afflicted for the 
loss of his children, (the histories of) these 
twenty four Rajas were told to him in the 
olden time by the celestial sage, Narada. 

228—229. But t>esides these, other kings, 
who were great car-warriors, who were more 
powerful than the above, who were noble in 
mind and full of every good quality, had 
also fallen into the grasp of Death. 

230—236. They were Puru, Kuru, Yadu, 
Sura, Bishyagashya, Mabadyuti, Anuha, 
Yuvanashwa, Kakustha, Vikrami, Raghu, 
Vijaya, Vitihotra, Anga, Bhava, Slnvcla, 


Vrihatguru, Ushinara, Sbataratha, Kanka, 
Duliduha, DRurua, Dambbodvaba, Para, 
Vena, Sagara, Sankriti, Nimi, Ajeya, 
Parashu, Pundra, Sambhu, Devavridha, An 
agha, Debabhaya, Supratima, Supratika Vrt- 
hadratha, Mahotshaha, Vinitatma, Sukratu, 
the King of Nishad Nala, Safyabrata, Santa- 
Vaya, Sumitra, Subala, Janujangha, Anara- 
nya, Arka, Pryavrattva, Shuchivrata, Bala- 
bandru, Niramarda, Kotusringa, Brihatbala, 
Dhristaketu, Brihatketu, Diptaketu, Nira» 
maya, Abikshita, Chapala, Dhurta, Krita 
bandhu, Dridhishudhi, Mahapuransambhava, 
Pratanga, Paraha and Sruti. These kings, 
and hundreds and thousands others, 

237-238. Who were greatly powerful and 
wise, had met death like your sons, quitting 
immense wealth and pleasure. 

239. Even those men, who possessed all 
the noble virtues, and whose heavenly 
valour, genorosity, magnanimity, faith, trqth, 
purity, simplicity and mercy, are published 
in the Puranas by the sacred bards of great 
learning, gave up their lives. 

240-241. Your sons were wicked, en 
vious, avaricious, of passionate temperament 
and vicious disposition ; you are well-versed 
in the Sastras, you are intelligent and wise ; 
those men whose understanding follows the 
dictates of the Sastras t never succumb to 
grief or misfortune. 

242. You know, O king, the severity and 
levity of fate. You know what anxiety you 
showed for the safety of your sons. There¬ 
fore, this grief is unbecoming of you. It is 
not fit for you to grieve for that which must 
happen. 

243. Who can avert by his cleverness the 
decrees of fate ? None can go beyond the 
path marked for him by Providence. 

244. Existence and non-existence, 
pleasure and pain, come by Time. 

245. Time creates all things and Time 
destroys them all. Time bums all creatures 
and Time again extinguishes that fire. 

246. All things, good and bad, iij the 
three worlds, arc created by Time. Time 
destroys them and Time creates them again. 

247. Time alone is awake when all is 
asleep. Time cannot be overcome by anyone 
Time walks in everything without 
being retarded. 

248. Knowing that all things, past, present
and future, are the outcome of Time, 
it is not fit for you to be overpome with 
grief. 

Sauti said ! 

249. Gavalgana’s son, (Sanjaya), having 
thus comforted the royal Dhritarashtra, who 
was overwhelmed with grief for the death 
of his sens, restored peace to his mind,- 

250. Great Dwaipavana composed a holy 
Upanishada on these /acts; and it has been 
published to the world by the learned and 
sacred bards in the Puranas. 

251. The study of Bharata is such an 
act of piety that even he who reads only 
one line of a verse with reverence has his sins 
all destroyed. 

252. In this Bharata , sinless and 
immaculate Devas, Devarshis, and Brahman as 
have been described as well as Yakshas and 
great Nagas. 

253 In it has also the possessor of six 
attributes, the eternal Vasudeva, been des¬ 
cribed. He is true and just, pure and holy. 

254. In it is described the eternal Brahma, 
the great true light, whose great and divine 
deeds the wise and learned men declare, 

255. From whom has been produced the 
non-dxistent, and existent-non-existent uni¬ 
verse with the principle of reproduction and 
progression, birth, death and rebirth. 

256. In it has also been described He 
who is Adhyatma t and who pertakes the 
attributes of the five elements, and He to 
whom unmanifested and other such words 
cannot be applied; 

$57. And also He whom the Yotis, pos¬ 
sessed of meditation and Tapa, behold in their 
hearts as the reflection of an image in a 
mirror. 

258. The man of faith, ever devoted, 
ever empiloyed in the exercise of virtue is
freed from sin on reading this Section of the 
Bharata. 

259. The believer who always hears this 
introductory Section of the Bharata from 
the beginning, never meets with any difficulties.


260. The man, who repeats any part of 
its introduction at the morning and evening 
twilights, at the time of repeating, is freed 
from sins collected during the day and 
aight. 

261. In the body of Bharata this Section 
is truth and ambrosia; as butter is among 
curds, and a Brahma na among bipeds, 

26a. As A rany aka among the Vedas, 
as ambrosia among medicines, as the ocean 
is great among all lakes, as cow among all 
quadrupeds, 

253. So is Bharata , among all histories. 
He, who’causes to be recited by a Brahmana 
even one line of it during a Sradh , gives 
to the dead ancestors his offerings of food 
and drink which become inexhaustible. 

264. The Vedas are expounded by the 
aid of history and Purana, 

265. But the Veda is afraid of men 
of little learning, lest they hurt it. The 

learned man, who recites this Veda, 
(Bharata) gains advantage. 

266. Even the sin of killing embryo 
is destroyed of those who read it with 
reverence at every change of the moon. 

267. I tell you, the whole Bharata has 
been read by the man who reads this 
chapter. The man who with reverence hears 
every day these sacred words, 

268-269. Gains long life, and goes to 
heaven. In time gone by, the celestials met 
together and placed the four Vedas on one 
side and this Bharata on the other side of a 
scale, and the Bharata weighed heavier. 

270. From that time, it is called Maha~ 
bharata . It is considered superior to the 
Vedas, both in substance and gravity of im¬ 
port. 

271. It is called Mahabharata from this 
superiority in substance and gravity of 
import. He, who understands its real meaning
ing, is freed from all sins. 

272. Tapa is not a sin, study is not a sin, 
the ordinances of the Vedas are not sins, the 
acquisition of wealth by exertion is not a 
sin ; when they are abused, then do they 
become the sources of evil. 

thus ends the Anukramanika Parva in the 

Adi Parva of the blessed Mahabharata.

Section 2

(PARVA SANGRAHA PARVA). 

The Sifthis said:— 

1. We wish to hear, O son of Suta, all 
about the place you called Samanta- 
panchaka. 

Sauti said :— 

2. Hear, O Brahmanas, the sacred words 
I say. You are fit, O best of men, to hear 
them. 

3. At the end of Treta and in the begin¬ 
ning of Dwapara Yuga, the greatest of all 
that ever wielded arms, Parushnrama, being 
impatient of wrongs, repeatedly destroyed all 
t he Kshatriya races of the world. 

4. That fiery Rama, after destroying the 
Kshatriyas by his own prowess, made five 
lakes of blood at Samantapanchaka. 

5. We have heard, that being senseless 
with anger, he offered oblations to the manes 
of his ancestors, standing in the bloody water 
of these lakes. 

6. Thereupon Richika and other of his 
ancestors appeared and said, “ Ramn, O 
blessed Rama, O son of Brigu, we ace 
pleased 


7. With your filial piety and prowess. 
O mighty one, blessing be upon you. O 
illustrious one, ask the boon you desire to 
have. 

Rama said:— 

8—9. If, O fathers, you are pleased with 
me, the boon, I ask, is that I may be freed 
from the sin of annihilating the Kshatriyas, 
and that the lakes, that I have made, may 
become celebrated shrines in the world. 

10. The ancestors then said, “It would 
be as you have wished. But be pacified.” 

11. The region, that lies near those five 
bloody lakes, has become famous from that 
day by the name of holy Samantapan- 
chaka. 

12. The wise men have said that every 
place should be known by a name significant 
of something which may have made it famous. 

13. At the end of Diva para and in the 
beginning of Kali, a great battle was fought 
between the Kurus and the Pandavas, here 
at this holy Samantapanchaka. 

14. In that holy place, where there was 
not the least ruggedness, were assembled 
eighteen Akshauhinis of soldiers, all eager 
for battle. 

15. O Brahmanas, they were all killed 
in that place. thus, O Brahmanas, its name 
is explained. 

t6. I have described to you that beauti¬ 
ful and holy place. I have told you, O best 
of Brahmanas, all about this place,—a place 
famous in the three worlds. 

The RishiB said 

17. We wish to know, O Son of Suta, 
all about Akshauhini which you have men¬ 
tioned to us. 

18. Tell us the numbers of horse and 
foot, chariots and elephants, which make 
an Akshahini , for you know every thing. 

Sauti said:— 

19. One chariot, and one elephant, five 
foot soldiers and three horse-men, form a 
Patti . 

20. Three Pattis make a Senamukha , 
three Senanyikhas make a Gulma. 

21. Three Gultnas make a Gana, three 
Ganas a Bahini, three Bahinis taking to¬ 
gether, form a Priiana . 

22. Three Pritanas make a Chamu , three 
Chamus an Anikini , and ten times one 
Anikini is called by the learned as one 
Akshauhini . 

23-24. O best of Brahmanas, mathe¬ 
maticians have calculated that there are 
twenty one thousand eight hundred and 
seventy chariots in an Akshauhini . The 
number of elephants is also the same. 

25—26. Know', the number of foot sol¬ 
diers is one hundred nine-thousand three 
hundred and fifty; the number of horses is 
sixty-five thousand six-hundred and three. 

27. Those who are acquainted with the 
principle of numbers call the above, explained 
fully by me, the numbers of an Akshauhini. 

2S. O best of Brahmanas, the eighteen 
Akshauhinis of the Kurus and the Pandava 
soldiers were composed according to tUU 
calculation. 

29. Time brought them all together in 
this place, and making the Kauravas the 
cause, destroyed them all. 

30. Bhishma, skillful in arms, fought for 
ten days. Drona defended the Kuru army 
for five days. 

31—32. The destroyer of enemy’s soldiers, 
Karna, fought for two days ; Sailya for half 
a day, and for a half a day then lasted the 
club-fight of Duryodhana and Bhima. At 
the close of that day, Ashwathama, Kirta- 
varma and Kripa, 

33. Destroyed the army of Yudhishthira 
when his soldiers were unsuspectingly sleep¬ 
ing. O Saunaka, the best of narrations, the 
Bharata , which is narrated here at your 
sacrifice, 

34. Was formerly narrated at the sacri¬ 
fice of Janamejaya by the learned pupil of 
Vyasa. In it has been fully described the 
fame and valour of the kings of the w'orld. 

35. There are three Parvas in the be- 
gining (of this great work), namely Paushya,
Pauloma and Astika, which contain many 
wonderful dictions and descriptions and 
senses. 

36. As men desirous of final release. 
accept Vairagya, so it is accepted by the 
wise. As Self is among things to be known,, 
as life among things that are dear f 

37. So is it the best among all histories 
and also among all Sastras . There is- not a 
story current in the world which does not de¬ 
pend on it. 

38—39. As the body depends on the food 
it partakes, as the servant who wishes for 
promotion serves a master of good birth, so 
all poets serve and cherish this Btiarata. 

40. As the words, constituting the various 
branches of knowledge and the Vedas, 
display vowels and consonants only, so this 
excellent history displays the highest 
knowledge. 

41. Hear the outlines of the Parvas 
fchapters'iof this Bharata history which is full 
of subtle meaning and logical connection. 

42. The first is called Anttkramanika, the 
second Parva Sangraha ; then come Paulama, 
Paushya , Asttka, Adivansavatarana , 

43. After this the wonderful and thoughtful 
Sambhava, then Yatugriha-daha, then 
Hairimba , 

44. Then Baha-badha, and then Chaitraratha 
, then Panchali-shaimvara Parva , 

45. Then after defeating the rivals in 
rightful battle Vaivahika Parva, then Viduragamana
and Rajya-lava, 

46. Then Arjuna-vanabasha, Subhadra- 
harana, Rajyalambha

47. Then Khandava-dahaJ and Moyadarsana, then 
Mantra Parva , come Shava Parva, and 

48. Then Jarasandha-badha, and Digvijaya
 ; after Digvijaya comes the Parva 
called Rajsuika. 

49. Then ArgJiyaviharatia, Shisupala - 
bad ha, Dyuta, Anudyuta Parva ; 

50. Then Aranyaka, Kirmira-badha, Ar- 
anavi gamana ; 

51. And then Kairati, in which the battle 
between Arjuna and Siva is described; 
Then Indralokavigamana . 

52. Then comes the pathetic, pious and 
religious story of Nala-nbakhyana ; Then 
Thirtha-jatra of the wise ting of the Kurus. 

53. Then Jatasura-badhA, then Yaksha- 
juddha, then Nebatkabacha-juddha, and 
Ajagara ; 

54. Then Ma rkandeya -samashya, then the 
Parva of the meeting of Draupadt and Satya - 
Varna ; 

55. Then Ghoshajatra, Mriga-smapna, 
then Brihidrauniakhyama ana Aindra - 
dRuruna ; 

56. Then Draupadt-harana-Parva, then 
yaidratha-bemochana, then the story of 
Ssvitri, illustrating love of husband and 
chastity; 

57. After this the story of Rama, then 
Kundala-harana Parva 

58. That which comes next is Aranaya
then Virata, where the Pandavas went 
(in disguise) and fulfilled their promise. 

59. Then the Kichaka-badha , then 
Gogrohana , then the marriage of Abhimanyu 
with the daughter of the king of Virata . 

60. Then is the most wonderful Parva 
Udyoga . The next on is Sanjaya-yana . 

61.Then comes Prajagara, the anxieties 
then Smnatsujata , the 
mysteries ef Philosophy. 

62. Then YaUsanddht , the arrival of Sri- 
krishna. Then the story of Malati and that 
of Galava; 

63. Then the stories of Savitri, Vamadeva 
and Vainya; then the stories of Yamadag- 
ni and Shodasharajika ; 

64. Then the arrival of Krishna at the 
court, then Bidula-Putra-shashana, then 
the assemblage of troops and the story of 
Seta; 

65. Then comes the quarrel of the noble 
Karna, then the march of the Kuru and 
Pandava armies to the field of battle. 

66. Then Ratharathi-Sankhya Parva , 
then the arrival of wrath-inspiring messenger 
Uluka ; 

67. Then the story of Amba, then the 
wonderful instalation of Bhishma ; 

68. Then (the account of) the creation o 
yanibtt and Bhumi, then the account of 
islands. 

69. Then Vagabata-Gita Parvq, then 
Bhishma-badha , then the instalation of Drona, 
and then the death of Sansaptakas ; 

70. Then Abhimanyu-badha , then Pra- 
ligma Parva, then yaidhratha-badha and 
GJiatatkacha-badha ; 

71. Then the hair-stirring Drona-badha f 
then the discharge of Narayana weapon ; 

72. Then Karna Parva , and then next 
to it is Sally a P arva, Then Hrada Prabesha 
Parva , then Gada-yudha ; 

73. Then Sarasvoata , and the description 
of Thirtha and Bangsa, and then Sonpiika , 
describing the disgraceful conduct of the 
Kurus. 

74. Then dreadful Aishika Parva, then 
yala-pradana , then Stribilapa ; 

75. Then Sradha Parva , describing the 
funeral rites for the killed Kurus; then Char- 
vaha-badha who appeared as a Brahmana. 

76. Then the coronation of wise 
Yudhishthira, then Griha-prabivaga ; 

77. Then Santi Parva, then Rajadharma- 
nushasharfa , then Apadharma ana Mukshya- 
dharma; 

78. Then come Sttka prasna-avigamanam , 
Brahma-prasna-anushashana , the origin of 
Dttrvasha, and colloquy with Maya, 

79. Next comes AnusJiashana, then the 
ascension of wise Bhishma to heaven. 

80. The next one is all sin-destroying 
Ashytamedha , and then Anu-Gita, con¬ 
taining spiritual philosophy. 

81. Next come Asramvasha, Putra-dar- 
sana , and the arrival of Narada ; 

82. Then comes Mau sal a , full of cruel 
and terrible incidents; then Mahaprasbhana j 
and the ascension to heaven. 


83. Then follows the Parana which is 
called Khila Haribansa, in it is Vishnu 
Parva, describing the early life of Vishnu 
and the destruction of Kansa. 

84. The last of all is Vavishya Parva 
which contains future prophecies. These are 
the one hundred Parvas, composed by the 
noble and great Vyasa. 

85. Having placed them in eighteen 
Parvas , the son of Lomharsana, the descen¬ 
dant of Suta, recited them in the forest of 
Naimisha; 

86. Of which the above is an abridge¬ 
ment. Adiparva contains Paushya, Paulama, 
Astika, Adivansavatara, 

87. Shamvaba; the burning of the 
house of lac, the destruction of Hirimba 
and Baka, and Chaitraratha, the Shwamvara 
of Draupadi; 

88. Her marriage after a righteous battle 
with the rivals, the arrival of Vidura, the 
regaining of kingdom, 

89. Arjuna's exile into jungle, the steal¬ 
ing of Subhadra, the gift and receipt of the 
marriage dower, the burning of Khandava 
forest, 

90. The meeting with Moya, —these are 
the contents of Adi Parva . The Poushya 
Parva contains the greatness of Utanga. 

91. In Paulama Parva the account of the" 
Brigu and his descndants has been nar¬ 
rated. Astika contains the account of the 
birth of Garuda and all the Nagas 

92—94. That of the churning of the 
ocean, the birth of Uchaisrava, and last of 
all, the Bharata dynasty as described at the 
snake-sacrifice of king Parikshit. Sham¬ 
vaba Parva treats of the births of various 
kings, sages and heroes, and that of the 
sage, Krishna Dwaipayana, the partial incar¬ 
nations of the celestials, 

95, The births of Daityas, Danavas’ 
powerful Yakshas, of Nagas, of Gandharvas’ 
of birds, 

96-97. And of all creatures, and lastly 
of the son of Shakuntala bv Dushyanta at 
the hermitage of the sage Kanwa, Bharata, 
the name by which his descendants, are 
known, 

98. It describes the greatness of the 
Bhagiraiht , and the births of the Vasus in 
the house of Shantanu, and their again going 
to heaven, 

99. And the birth of fiery Bhishma, his 
renunciation of royalty, his adoption of 
Brahmacharya , too. His adherence to his vow, his rescue 
of Chitrangada, his protection of his younger 
brother aftfer the death of Chitrangada, 

101. Hrs placing Vichitravirya on the 
throne, the birth of Dharma on account of 
the curse of Animandavya, 

102. The births of Dhritarashtra and 
Pandu, by the blessing of Krishna Dwai¬ 
payana, and also the birth of the Pandavas, 

103. The conspiracy of Duryodhana to 
send the Pandavas to Baranavata, and other 
plottings of the sons of Dhritarashtra against 
the Pandavas, 

104. Advice given to Yudhishthira in the 
language of the Mlechhas by that well- 
Visher of the Pandavas, Vidura, 

105—106. Digging of a under-ground pas¬ 
sage An consequence of the words of Vidura; 
the burning of Purochana and the sleeping 
hunter-woman with her five sons in the 
house of lac; the meeting of Pandavas with 
Hirimba in the forest, 

107. Then the destruction of Hirimba by 
powerful Bhima; then the birth of Ghatat- 
kacha, 

108. The meeting of the Pandavas with 
Vyasa, their stay according to his advice in 
a Brahmana's house at Ekchakra 

109. In disguse ; the destruction of Baka 
and the ashtonishment of the people. 
 The wonderful births of Krishna 
and Dristadumna; hearing from a Brahmana 
the news of the Sy am vara, and in obedience 
tQ the request of Vyasa, 

111. And also moved by the desire to 
win the hand of Draupadi, the departure of 
the Pandavas to Panchala ; 

112. The victory of Arjuna over Angara- 
pama on the banks of the Bhagirathi; 
making friendship with him, and to hear 
from nim 

113. The accounts of Tapati, Vasistha 
and Aurva; then the arrival of the Pan¬ 
davas with all the brothers at Panchala ; 

114. The hitting of the mark at the city, 
of Panchala by Arjuna, and the acquisition 
of Draupadi by him in the midst 01 all the 
kings of the world, 

115. The defeat of Sallya, Karna and aH 
the angry kings by powerful Bhima and 
Arjuna m the batde that ensued; 

116 The ascertainment by Rama and 
Krishna from the great expipits of the 
brothers that they were Pandavas ; 

117. Their arrival at the house of the 
potter where the brothers were living; the 

rief of Drupada, because Draupadi would 
e married to five husbands ; 

118. The story of five Indras told in eon- 
sequence; the wonderful and divinely 
arranged marriage of Draupadi , 


119. The sending of Vidura as an envoy 
the Pandavas from the sons of Dhrita- 
rastra ; his arrival; and his meeting with 
Krishna; 

120. Living of the Pandavas at Indra- 
prasta and their rule over half of the kingdom
; the fixing of hours for the five 
brothers to live with Draupadi as directed by 
Narada ; 

121—123. The histories of Sinda and 
Upasanda are narrated ; and then the departure 
of Arjuna to the forest according to the 
vow, and on account of his seeing Yudhishthira 
and Draupadi sitting together when he entered 
into the room to take arms to rescue the 
kine of a Brahmana ; the meeting of Arjuna 
with Ulupa on his way. 

124. It then describes the birth of Vabru- 
vahana ; and the account of Arjuna’s visit to 
many holy pilgrimages ; the deliverance by 
Arjuna of tne five celestial maidens, 

125. Who had become aligators by the 
curse of an ascetic Brahmana; the meeting 
of Arjuna and Krishna at the holy pilgrim- 
age-of Provasha ; 

126. Arjuna’s taking of Subhadra by 
force with the permission of Krishna on the 
car which goes every where at the will of the 
rider; 

127. Taking the dower of Krishna, 
Arjuna’s departure to Indraprasta ; the birth of 
that prodigy of prowess, Abhimanyu, in the 
womb of Subhaara ; 

128. The birth of the children of Drau¬ 
padi ; the pleasure trip of Arjuna and 
Krishna to tne banks of the Yamuna ; 

129. The acquisition by them the celebrated
bow Gandiva and the discus; the 
burning of the forest of Khandava; the 
saving of the life of Moya and the serpent; 

130. The giving bigtH to a son by 
Rishi Mandapala in the womb of a bird, 
called Sharangi. The Adiparva has been 
described with these various matters.

131. Greatly powerful Vyasa has divided 
this Parva into two hundred and twenty 
seven chapters. 

132. These two hundred and twenty- 
seven chapters contain eight thousand eight 
hundred and eighty-four slokas. 

133. The second is Shava Parva which 
is very extensive and full of matter. It describes
the building of the assembly-hall by 
the Pandavas, and the review of their 
servants ; 

134. The description of the courts of 

Lokapalas by Narada vho knows all the 
celestial regions; the preparations for the 
Raisuya Yagma ; the destruction of Jarasandha;


135, The deliverence by Krishna of aff 
the princes that were kept as prisoners (by 
Jarasandha) at (his capital city') Giribraia, 
Then it relates the conquest of the world by 
the Pandavas ; 

136, The arrival of the chiefs and potentates 
with tribute at the Rajsuya Yagma ; the 
destradon of Shishupala at the sacrifice, in 
connection with Arghya giving ; 

137 The grief and envy of Duryodhana 
at the sight of the magnificience of the 
sacrifice; the joking of Bhima at the 
expense of Duryodhana in the great assembly. 

138. The preparation for the game of 
dice ; the defeat of Yudhishthira at the play by 
: cunning and crafty Shakuni; 

139. The deliverance, by the greatly 
wise Dhritarashtra, of the sorrowful Draupadi 
who was sunk in the ocean of distress on 
account of the game ; 

140. Seeing this, the attempt of Duryodhana 
to engage Yudhishthira again in game ; 

141. The exile of Yudhishthira with his 
brothers by the victorious Duryodhana. 
These are the matters that have been dwelt 
in the Shava Parva. 

142 —43. This Parva is divided into 
seventy eight chapters, and it contains, O 
best of Branmanas, two thousand five hundred, 
and seven slokas. Then comes the third 
Parva , called Aranya. 

144. It describes the departure of the 
Pandavas to the forest with the citizens 
following the wise Yudhishthira; 

145 —4b. In order to be gifted with the 
power of supplying food to the Brahmanas, 
Yudhishthira's adoration of the Sun by the 
advice of Dhaumya; the creation of food by this 
means; the expulsion of Vidura who was 
always a well-wisher of his master ; 

147. Vidura’s coming to the Pandavas ; 
his return to Dhritarashtra by bis request; 

148. The conspiracy of Duryodhana, 
being incited by Karna, to destroy the 
roving Pandavas; 

149. Having learnt this evil intention of 
Duryodhana, VVasa’s arrival to him. His 
discussion with Duryodhana on the point of 
his going to the forest (after the Pandavas); 
the history of Suravi related ; 

150. The arrival of Maitri and his instructions to Dhritarashtra; his curse to 
Duryodhana; 

151. The slaying of Kirmira by Bhima, 
the arrival of the Panchalas and Vrisnis; 

152. Having heard that the Pandavas 
had been defeated at an uniust game of dice 
by Shakuni. the arrival of Krishna, and his 
allaying of the anger of Arjuna; 


153. The lamentation of Draupadi before 
Krishna, and his cheering of her ; 

154. The account of the fall of Souva 
was described by the great Rishi. Then it 
describes the departure of Krishna to 
Dwarika with Subnadra and her son ; 

155. The taking of Draupadi's sons by 
Dhristadyumna to Panchala ; the entrance 
of the Pandavas to the beautiful forest of 
Dwaita. 

156. It then relates the conversation of 
Bhima, Yudhishthira and Draupadi; 

157. The arrival of Vyasa to the Pan¬ 
davas, the bestowal of power of Pralismriti 
to Yudhishthira by the great Rishi. 

158. It then describes the departure of 
Vyasa, the Pandavas' removal to the forest 
of Kamyaka; the rovings of gready power¬ 
ful Arjuna in quest of weapons ; 

159. His fight with Siva who was in the 
disguise of a hunter ; his meeting with the 
Lokapalas, and his receipt of weapons from 
them; 

160. His journey to the celestial kingdom 
of Indra, and the anxiety of Dhritarashtra in 
consequence. 

161. It then relates the lamentations of 
Yudhishthira in his meeting with the holy 
sage Brihadaswa. 

162. It then contains the holy and most 
pathetic storv of Nala, illustrating the great 
patience of Damayanti and the character 
Nala. 

163. It then describes how Yudhishthira 
acquired the mysteries of dice from the great 
Rishi; then the arrival of great Rishi 
Lomasha from the celestial rigion where 
Arjuna was; 

164. The receipt from the Rishi bv the 
high-souled dwellers of forest (the Pandavas) 
the news of the third brother (Arjuna) who 
was then staying in the celestial regions; 

165. The pilgrimages of the Pandavas 
to various holy places as asked by Arjuna ; 
their attainment of merit and virtue in 
consequence ; 

166. The arrival of great sage Narada at 
the holy shrine of Pulastha ; the arrival of 
the high-souled Pandavas also at that holy 
pilgrimage. 

167. Then it relates the account of the 
deprivation of Karna of his “ear-rings" 
by Indra, and then the sacrificial greatness 
of Gya; 

168 . The story of Agasta which relates 
how he ate up the Asura , Batapi; 
his connection with Lopamudra to have a offspring. 

169. It then tells the story of Rishwa- 
sringa who adopted the life of an ascetic from 
his boyhood. Then follows the story of greatly 
powerful Rama, the son of Jamadagni, 

170. In which is described the death of 
Kartavirya and Haihavas ; then the meet¬ 
ing of the Pandavas and the Vrisnis at the 
holy pilgrimage of Provasha ; 

171. The story Sukanya in which Brigu's 
son, Chyavana, made the Aswinas drink 
Soma Juice at the sacrifice of king Saryati, 

172. And in which it has been shown 
how he himself (Chyavana) acquired perpetual 
youth. Then it relates the history of 
King Mandhata ; 

173. Then it tells the story -of prince 
anta, and how king Somaha, by offering up 
is only son Janta in sacrifice, got one 

hundred others. 

174. Then follows the beautiful story of 
the hawk and the pegion ; then the trial of 
king Shivi by Indra, Agni and Dharma, 

175—76. The story of Astabakra in 
which is narrated the great debate between 
that Rishi and the first of logicians, named 
Vandi, the son of Varuna ; 

177. The defeat of Vandi and the release 
of the father of the Rishi (Astabakra) 
from the ocean. Then follows the story of 
Yavakrita, then that of the great Raiva, 

178. Then the departure of the Panda¬ 
vas for Gandhamadana, and their staying at 
a hermitage called Narayana ; Bhima’s journey
to Oandhamadana by the request of 
Draupadi ; 

179. His meeting on his way with the 
Pavana’s son, greatly powerful, Hanqmana, 
who was in a grove of bannanas ; 

180. His bath in the tank, and the des¬ 
truction of its flowers in searching fer the 
sweet-scented flower Nalyti ; his fight with 
powerful Rakshasas, 

181. Yakshas, including Manimana ; the 
destruction of the Asura Jata by him ; 

182. The meeting (of the Pandavas) 
with the Royal sage Vrishayarva ; their departure
for the hermitage of Arshtishena, 
and then their stay there ; 

183. The inciting of Bhima against the 
Kurus by Draupadi. Then is related the 
ascent of Kalludia by Bhima, where with the 
powerful Yakshas, 

184. Headed by Manimana, he fought a 
great battle; the meeting of the Pandavas
with Kuvera. Then comes the meeting 
with Arjuna who had obtained many great 
weapons. 

185. Then it relates the battle between 
Arjuna and the great enemy of the celestials, 
Nebalkabacha, who dwelt in Hirnyaparva, 

186. Then comos the account of Arjuna’s 
fight with Poulamas and Kalkeyas; their 
death at his hand; 

187. The display of weapons by Arjuna 
before Yudhishthira and its prevention by the 
great Rishi Narada.

188. The descent of the Pandavas from 
the Gandhamadana; the siezure of Bhima by 
a monster mountain-snake ; 

189. The release of Bhima from the snake 
on answering certain questions of his by 
Yudhishthira; 

190—191. The return of the Pandavas to 
the forest of Kamyaka; the arrival of 
Krishna to see the sons of Pandu; the 
arrival of Rishi Markandeya; and his various 
recitals; 

19a. The story of Pritha, the son of 
Vena, was told by the Rishi; also the story of 
Saraswati and that of Rishi Tarkhya. 

193. Then follows the story of Matsa 
and other old stories recited by Markandeya. 

194. Then come the stories of Indra- 
dumna, and Dhundumara, then the story 
of the chaste wife, and the history of 
Angirasha. 

195. Then is told the meeting of Draupadi 
and Satwavama and their conversation ; the 
return of the Pandavas to the forest of 
Dwaita; 

196. The procession of the calves, and 
the captivity of Duryodhana at the hands of 
Gandharvas. His rescue by Arjuna when 
the wretch was being carried away. 

197. Then follows the dream of the deer 
by Yudhishthira, then the return of the Pandavas
to the forest of Kamyaka. 

198. Here follows the long story of 
BrihadraUnika. Here is related the story of 
Durvasa. 

199-—200. Then is narrated the forcible 
abduction of Draupadi by Jayadratha from 
the hermitage; the pursuit of the wretch 
by Bhima, swift as the air; the shaving 
of Jayadhratha at the hand of Bhima. Then 
follows the long story of Ramayana, 

201. In which is shown how Ravana was 
killed by the prowess of Rama. Then is 
narrated the story of Savitri, 

202. Then Karna’s deprivation of ear¬ 
rings by Indra, and his presentation to him 
a weapon called Sakti ; 

203. The story of Aranya in which 
pharma gave advice to his son, and in which 
is related how the Pandavas received a boon 
and went to the west. 

204—206. These matters are all described
in the third Parva called Aranyaka. It 
contains two hundred and sixty-nine chapters. 
Its number of slokas is eleven thousand, 
six hundred and sixty four. Then 
comes the extensive Virata Parva . 

207. It describes how the Pandavas 
arrived at the city of Virata and saw a Sami 
tree in a burning place on which they kept 
hidden their weapons. 

208—209. Then have been related their 
entry into the city and their stay in disguise : 
then the slaying by Bhima of the wicked 
Kichaka who lustfully aspired for Draupadi; 
then the attempt ot king Duryodhana to 
find out the Pandavas ; 

210. His despatch of clever spies to all 
countries to trace out the Pandavas ; their 
failure to discover the mighty sons of 
Pandu ; 

211. The first siezure of Virata’s kine by 
the Trigartas, the fearful battle that fol¬ 
lowed ; 

212. The capture of Virata by the enemy 
and his rescue by Bhima ; the release of 
his kine also by the Pandava (Bhima) ; 

213. The seizure of Virata’s kine by the 
Kurus, the defeat of the Kuru warriors by 
single handed Arjuna, 

214—215. The release of the king’s kine 
by Arjuna’s valour; the bestowal by 
Virata of his daughter to Arjuna for his 
acceptance of her for his son by Subjiadra, 
Abhimanyu, the destroyer of foes. These 
are the contents of the extensive fourth 
Parva Virata . 

216—117. The great Rishi has composed 
it in sixty seven chapters and it contains 
two thousand and fifty slokas . 

218. Hear now, the contents of the fifth 
Parva , named Udyoga . When the
Pandavas were living at Upaplavya, 

219. Desirous of battle, both Arjuna and 
Duryodhana went to Krishna, and said 
“You should help us in this war.” 

220. On these words being uttered, the 
high-souled Krishna replied, “ O best of 
men, a counsellor (myself) who will not 
fight, 

221. And one Akshauhini of my soldiers, 
between these two which shall 1 give to 
you ?” Blind to his own interest, the foolish 
Duryodhana asked for the soldiers. 

222. Arjuna asked to possess Krishna 
as a counsellor, although he will not fight. 
Then is related the coming of the king of 
Madra for the assistance of the Pandavas. 

223. Having deceived him on the way 
by presents, Duryodhana induced him to 
grant him a boon, and for that boon he 
asked his help in the war. 


224. Then it narrated how Sallya went to 
the Pandavas and how he consoled 
Yudhishthira by recounting the victory of 
Indra (over Vitra.) 

225—226. Then is told the despatch of the 
Purohita by the Pandavas to the Kurus. 
Greatly powerful Dhritarashtra, having 
heard the story of Madra’s victory from 
the Purohita , decided to send his Purohita , 
but finally sent Sanjaya to the Pandavas to 
ask for peace. 

227—228.—Dhritarashtra heard all about 
the Pandavas, their friends, Krishna and 
others ; and his great anxiety and sleeplessness
in consequence. Vidura’s sound, wise 
and various counsels given to the wise king, 
Dhritarashtra. 

229. It then contains the excellent 
truths of spiritual philosophy that were 
told by Sanatsujata 

230. To thefanxious and sorrowing king. 
Next morning in the Royal court, Sanjaya 
spoke 

231. Of the great friendship between 
Arjuna and Krishna. It was then that 
great Krishna, moved by pity and being 
desirous of bringing peace, 

232. Went himself to Hastinapur, the 
capital of the Kurus. (It then relates) the 
-rejection of the peaceful offer of Krishna by 
prince Duryodhana, 

233. An offer which was for the benefit 
of both parties. Then is related the story 
of Damvodvava; 

234. Then the search for a bridegroom 
by Matali for his daughter ; then follows the 
history of the great Rishi Galava. 

235. Then the story of the training of 
the son of Bidula; having heard of the 
evil counsel of Duryodhana and Karna and 
others. 

236. Krishna's display of his Yoga 
powers; then his taking Karna on his 
chariot and giving him sound advice ; 

237. Karna's rejection of Krishna’s advice 
out of pride; then the chastiser of his enemies, 
Krishna returned to Upaplavya from Hasti¬ 
napur. 

238—239. He told the Pandavas all that 
had happened. It was then the greatly 
powerful Pandavas, the chastisers their 
toes, after consulting properly with one 
another, made all preparations for war. 

240 Then follows the march of infantry, 
cavalry, elephants and charioteers from 
Hastinapur; the review of troops by both 
parties; the sending of Uluka to the 
Pandavas by the prince (Duryodhana) 

241. As an envoy on the day before 
the great battle; then the number of 
charioteers of different classes was related. 
Then is told the story of Amba. 

242. These are the matters that have 
been dwelt on, the fifth Parva of the Bharata 
in full of incidents regarding both peace 
and war. 

243—244. O Great Rishis, the great 
Vyasa has composed this Parva in one hundred
and eighty six chapters. The number 
of slokas composed in it by the great Rishi 
is six thousand six hundred and ninety 
eight. 

245. Then is told the wonderful Bhishma 
Parva . Sanjaya related in it the creation of 
Jambu country. 

246. Then is narrated the great depression 
of the army of Yudhishthira ana the 
fierce battle that raged for ten successive 
days. 

247. The high souled Krishna dispelled 
in this Parva the great compunction which 
was felt by Arjuna towards his relatives, by 
citing reasons based on the philosophy of 
final emancipation. 

248—249. In it is also narrated how the 
magnanimous Krishna, seeing the loss inflicted 
on the Pandava army, jumped f fronr 
the chariot and ran swiftly, with dauntless 
breast and his driving whip in hand, to kill 
Bhishma. In this Parva also, Krishna smote 
Arjuna, 

250. The bearer of the Gandiva and the 
greatest warrior in battle among all wielders 
of weapons. In it also is narrated how the 
bow-man Arjuna, placing Shikhandi before 
him 

251. Wounded Bhishma with his sharpest 
arrows and felled him from his chariot, and 
how dhisma lay on his bed of arrows. 

252—254. This extensive Parva is tlie- 
sixth in the Bharata, It is composed of 
one hundred and seventeeen chapters. Its 
number of slokas is five thousand eight 
hundred and eighty-four as composed by 
Vyasa, well-learned in the Vedas. Thei> 
comes Drona Parva h full of wonderful 
incidents. 

255—256. It relates the [installation of 
greatly powerful instructor Drona as the 
commander of the army ; the vow of making 
Yudhishthira prisoner was taken bv the great 
warrior to please Duryodhana; the retreat 
of Arjuna before the Sansaptakas ; 

257. The overthrow by Arjuna of the 
great king Vagadatta, as great a warrior as 
ndra himself, with his elephant Supratika ; 

258. The death of the boy-hero, Abhimanyu in his teens, 
alone and unsupported  
at the hands of many great car-warriors
including Jayadratha. 


259. On the death of Abhimanyu, the 
destruction by Arjuna of seven Akhau - 
hints of soldiers with Jayadratha in a great 
battle. 

260. Then in order to search Partha, 
greatly powerful Bhima and the great car- 
warrior Satyaki, by command of king 
Yudhishthira, 

261. Entered into the Kaurava ranks, 
impenetrable even by the celestials; the 
destruction of the rest of the Sansaptakas. 

262—263. I n this Drona Parva is narrated 
the deaths of Alambu$a,Srutayus, Shomdatti, 
Birata, great car-warrior Drupada, Ghatat- 
kacha and others. Being exceedingly angry 
on account of the death of Drona in battle, 
Ashwathama also, 

264. discharged his fearful weapon 
Narayana. Then is told the story of Rudra, 
in connection with the burning of the cities. 

265. The arrival of Vyasa, and the glories 
of Partha and Krishna are told by him. 

266. These are the matters elaborately 
narrated in the seventh Parva of the Bharata t 
in which all the chiefs and potentates men¬ 
tioned were killed. 

267—268. The number of chapters in this 
Parva is one hundred and seventy. The 
number of slokas composed in the Drona 
Parva by the great Rishi, the son of 
Parasara and the master of great knowledge, 
is eight thousand and nine hundred. 

279. Then comes the most wonderful 
Parva named Karna . In it is described 
the appointment of king of the Madra as the 
charioteer (of Karna). 

--270. Then is told the old story of the 
death of Tripura; the interchange of 
strong words between Karna and Sallya on 
their setting out to battle. 

271. Then is narrated the story of the 
swan and the crow as an insulting allusion 
to Karna. Then is the death of Pandya at 
the hands of the high souled Ashwathama. 

272—273. Then the death of Dandasen 
and then that of Danda, then the imi- 
nent risk of Yudhishthira in single combat 
with Karna which took place before all the 
warriors ; the anger of Yudhishthira and 
Arjuna towards each other ; 

274—275. Krishna's pacification of Ar¬ 
yuna ; Bhima’s fulfilment of his vow by 
drinking the heart’s blood of Dushasana 
after ripping open his breast; the slaying of 
Karna by Arjuna in single combat. 

276—277. The readers of the Bharata 
calls this Parva the eighth Parva. The num¬ 
ber of its chapters is sixty nine, and that of 
the stokas is four thousand nine hundred 
and sixty four. 


278. Then is told the wonderful Parva f 
called Sallya . After the death of all 
great warriors, the king of Madra became 
the commander. 

279. Then is described one after the other 
the encounters of various charioteers ; 
then the deaths of the chief warriors of 
the Kuru army. 

280. Then the death of Sallya at the 
hands of Yudhishthira, the death of Shakuni at 
the hands of Sahadeva. 

281. When only a small remnant of hi 
troops remained alive, Yuyudhana retired in¬ 
to a lake, and there creating room for him¬ 
self, lay hidden. 

282—283. The receipt of this news by 
Bhima from a hunter. Then is related how 
Duryodhana, ever unable to bear affronts, 
came out of the water, being angered by 
the insulting words of Yudhishthira. Then 
is described the fight of Bhima and 
Duryodhana with clubs. 

284. The arrival of Balarama at the 
time of the fight is next described. Then 
is told the sacredness of the Saraswati. 

285—286. The continuation of the club 
fight ; the breaking of Duryodhana's thighs 
by Bhima by a fearful hurl of his club. 
All this has been described in the wonderful 
ninth Parva. 

287—288. The number of chapters in this 
Parva is fifty-nine, and the number of shlokas 
composed by the great Vyasa, the 
spreader of the fame of the Kuru Dynasty, 
is three thousand two hundred and twenty. 

289—290. I shall now describe the contents 
of the fearful tenth Parva , named Sauptika . 
On the departure of the Pandavas, the 
great car-warriors, Kritavarma, Kripa and 
the son of Drona (Ashwathama) came to 
the field of battle in the evening. 

291. They saw King Duryodhana lying 
on the ground, his thighs broken, and his 
body covered with blood. The great car- 
warrior, fearfully angry son of Drona 
vowed, 

292. “I will not take off my armour without 
killing all the Panchalas with Dhristadyumna 
, and the Pandavas with their allies.

293. Having said these words, the three 
warriors left Duryodhana and entered into 
the great forest just when the sun was setting.

294. While they were resting under a 
large banian tree, they saw an owj killing 
innumerable crows one after the other. 

295. Seeing this, Ashwathama, his heart 
being full of rage, remembering the death 
of his father, determined to kill the sleeping 
Panchalas. 


296. Going to the gate of the camp, he 
saw a fearful Rakshasa, his head reaching 
to the very skies, guarding the door. 

297. Seeing also that the Rakshasa obs¬ 
tructed him in his discharge of weapons, he 
began to worship the ihree-eyed divinity, 
and it pacified him. 

298—300. Then accompanied by Kripa 
and Kritavarma, he entered the camp and 
Icilled all the sons of Draupadi and all the 
family of Panchalas, including Dhrista- 
dyumna, when they were all unsuspectingly 
sleeping on their beds. Only Satyaki and 
the five Pandavas escaped through the 
counsel of Krishna. 

301. The charioteer of Dhristadyumna 
brought to the Pandavas the news of 
the massacre of the slumbering Panchalas 
by the son of Drona. Draupadi, agrieved 
by the death of her father, brother and 
sons. 

302. Sat before her husbands and 
resolved to die of fasting. Then Bhima 
of fearful deed, being moved by the words 
of Draupadi, 

303. Determined to please her. He 
speedily took up his dub and ran in pursuit 
of the son of his preceptor. 

304. The son of Drona, out of fear of 
Bhima, and as fate would have it, discharged 
the celestial weapon, crying “Let it make 
the worid free of all the Pandavas.” 

305. Krishna neutralised the words by 
saying, ” This shall not be,” and Arjuna 
neutralised the weapon by one of his own. 

306. Seeing the wicked intention of 
Ashwathama, Dwaipayana cursed him, and 
he too cursed Dwaipayana. 

307. The Pandavas took the Jewel on the 
head of Ashwathama, and they with much 
pleasure presented it to the agrieved and 
sorrowing Draupadi. 

308—309. These matters are dwelt on 
in this tenth Sauptika Parva . The great 
Vyasa composed it in eighteen chapters. 
The numbers of slokas composed in it by 
the great reciter of the sacred truths, is 
eight hundred and seventy. 

31 o. The great Rishi has put together 
two Parvas, namely Sauptika and Aishika 
in this Parva. '1 hen the most pathetic 
Parva called Stree is next told. 

311—313. Then greatly wise Dhrita- 
rastra, being much afflicted by the death 
of his sons, moved with vengence, crushed 
into pieces an iron statue, the substitute for 
Bhima,—placed before him by Krishna. 
Then Vidura consoled the great king by 
removing his wordly affections with reasons 
pointing to final emancipation. 

314. Then is described the journey of 
Dhritarashtra with the ladies of his house, 
to the field of battle. 

315. Then were the pathetic and heart 
rending lamentations of the wives of the 
heroes. The wrath of Gandhari and 
Dhritarashtra, and their falling into a swoon. 

316. Then did the ladies see those heroes, 
—their slain sons, brothers and fathers,— 
lying on the field of battle. 

317. The pacification by Krishna of the 
wrath of Gandhari, who was greatly afflicted
by the death of her sons and grandsons. 

318. The cremation of the chiefs and 
potentates by king Yudhishthira, the greatly 
wise and the foremost of all virtuous men, 
according to due rites. 

3to. When the presentation of water to 
the deceased princes was commenced, Kunti 
acknowledged Karna as her son born in 
secret.

320. All this has been described by the 
great Rishi Vyasa in the most pathetic 
eleventh Parva . 

321—322. Its perusal moves every heart 
and draws tears from every eye. It contains 
twenty-seven chapters, and its number of 
slokas is seven hundred and seventy-five. 

323. Then comes the Santi Parva , the 
twelvth in number, which increases the un¬ 
derstanding. It relates the despondency of 
Yudhishthira 

324-325. On his having slain his father, 
brothers, sons, maternal uncles and relations 
by marriage. There is related how Bhishma, 
on his bed of arrows, told various systems, of 
laws and duties, worth the study of kings 
who desire to possess knowledge. 

326. If a person understands them, he 
attains to consummate knowledge. The 
mysteries of final emancipation is also elaborately 
discussed. 

327. This twelvth Parva , the favourite of 
the wise, contains three hundred and thirty 
nine chapters. 

328—329. O Rishis, the wise son of 
Parasara has described this Parva in four¬ 
teen thousand seven hundred and thirty two 
Parva . 

330. The king of the Kurus, Yudhishthira 
was consoled by hearing the expositions of 
duties by the son of the Bhagirathi, Bhishma. 

331. It then treats of the rules of Dharma 
and Artha in detail, then the various rules 
of charity and its different merits ; 

332. The different merits of charity ac¬ 
cording to the subjects of charity; the 
rules of living, the ceremonials of individual 
duty, and the matchless merit of truth. 

333. It describes the great merit of 
Brahmanas, and kine, and it reveals the 
duties in relation to time and place. 

334. All these excellent matters have 
been treated in this Anushashana Parva 
containing variety of incidents. It also des¬ 
cribes ascension of Bhishma to heaven. 

335. It contains one hundred and forty 
six chapters. 

336. The number of slokas in it is eight 
thousand. Then comes the, fourteenth 
Parva, called Ashwamedhika . 

337. It relates the beautiful story of 
Samvasta and Marutta; the discovery of 
treasures (by the Pandavas). Then is des¬ 
cribed the birth of Parikshit, 

338. Who was burnt by the weapon (of 
Asnwathama and therefore almost dead), 
but he was revived by Krishna ; Arjuna’s 
journey with the sacrificial horse let loose, 

339. And his fight with various chiefs and 
potentates who seized it in wrath, the en¬ 
counter of Arjuna with the son of Chitran- 
gada, 

340. And his great risk in the fight with 
Vabruvahana. Then follows the story of 
the mongose in the horse-sacrifice. 

341. thus is described the wonderful 
Parva, called Ashwamedhika . Its number 
of chapters is one hundred and three. 

342. The number of slokas, composed by 
the greatly wise Rishi, is three thousand 
three hundred and twenty. 

343—345. Then comes the fifteenth 
Parva , named Asramvasika, in which, ab¬ 
dicating the kingdom and accompani¬ 
ed by Gandhari and Vidura, the King 
Dhritarashtra went to the forest. Seeing 
this, virtuous Pritha ( Kunti ), ever 
engaged In serving her superiors, left the 
kingdom of her sons and followed the old 
couple. 

346. His wonderful seeing of the spirits 
of the slain heroes through the favour of 
Vyasa. 

347. On this the old monarch aban¬ 
doned his sorrow, and acquired with his 
wife the highest fruits of his virtuous deeds. 
Vidura also attained to the highest state, 
having leaned on virtue all his life. 

348. The learned son of Gavalgana, 
the wise and learned Sanjaya also attained 
to the highest state. Then it relates the 
meeting of the just king Yudhishthira with 
Narada. 

349. Yudhishthira heard from him the des¬ 
truction of the Vrisni race. thus is des¬ 
cribed this wonderful Parva, called Asram¬ 
vasika.


350-351. The number of chapters in it 
is forty two and the number of slokas ,
composed by the great Rishi, learned truth, 
is one thousand five hundred and six. Then 
is told the terrible Mausala Parva . 

352-353. They relate how on account of 
the Brahmana’s curse, when they were all 
deprived of their senses with drink, those 
tigers of men (belonging to the Vrisni race), 
with many scars of battle on their bodies, slew 
one another on the shores of the salt-sea 
with Eraka grass which became deadly 
thunders in their hands. 

354. It then relates that Rama and 
Krishna, after destroying their race, did 
not rise superior to the sway of all-destroying 
Time. 

355. Then is described the arrival of 
Arjuna, the foremost of men, at Dwarka, 
and his sorrow and affliction on seeing the 
city destitute of the Vrisnis. 

356. Performing the funeral ceremony 
of his maternal uncle Basudeva, the foremost
most man of the Yadu dynasty, he saw 
the Yadu heroes lying dead where they 
had been drinking. 

357. He then performed the cremation 
ceremonies of the illustrious Krishna and 
Balarama, and of the other chief men of 
the Yadu race. 

358. Then is described the journey of 
Aiyuna from Dwarka with the women, and 
children, the old and the decrepit, and the 
great c ilamity he mcr with on the way. 
He also saw the overthrow of his Gandiva. 

559. He also saw unpropitiousness of 
his celestial weapons. Seeing that it was 
impossible to protect the Yadu women, 

360. And seeing all this, he went 
to Yudhishthira by the advice of Vyasa, and 
asked permission to adopt the life of an 
ascetic. 

361-362. thus is described the sixteenth 
Parva, called Mausala Parva . Its number 
of chapters is eight and the number of slo¬ 
kas, composed by Vyasa, learned in truth, 
is three hundred and twenty. The next is 
Mahaprasthanika , the seventeenth Parva, 

363. It relates that the best of men, the 
Pandavas, abdicating their kingdom went 
with Draupadi in their great journey (
Mahaprasthana.) 

364. They met with Agni when they 
arrived at the sea of red waters. Asked 
by Agni, the high-sould Partha, 

365-366. After worshipping him duly, 
returned to him the great celestial bow 
Gandiva. Yudhishthira went on his journey, 
and did not look back when one after the 
other his brothers, including Draupadi, 
dropped down dead. thus is told the 
seventeenth Parva, called Mahaprasthanika. 

367. There are three chapters in 
it, and the number of slokas, composed by 
all truth-knowing Vyasa, is three hundred 
and twenty. 

368. Know, the Parva that comes next 
is called Sarga, full of heavenly matters ; in 
which is related how the celestial car came 
to take Yudhishthira. 

369—370. He, however, declined to ascend 
it without the doe that accompanied him. 
Seeing the steady adherence of the illus¬ 
trious Yudhishthira to virtue Dharma giving 
up the form of the dog, showed himself to the 
king. Then Yudhishthira, attaining to the 
celestial regions, felt much pain. 

371. The celestial messenger showed 
him hell by deception, where the virtuous 
minded king heard the heart-rending 
lamentations of his brothers, 

372. Suffering in that region by the laws 
of Yama. This was shown to Yudhishthira 
by Indra and Dharma. 

373. Then Yudhishthira, after bathing in 
the celestial Ganga, gave up his human 
body and gained that state which his acts 
merited. 

374. He lived in happiness, honoured 
by Indra and the celestials. This is the 
eighteenth Parva narrated by the illustrious 
Vyasa. 

375—376. The number of chapters in 
it is five, and its number of slokas , O 
Rishis, composed by the great Vyasa, is 
two hundred and nine. These are tne con¬ 
tents of the eighteen Paruas. 

377—378. There are Harivansa and 
Vavisya in its appendix. The number of 
slokas , composed by the great Rishi in the 
Harivansa, is twelve thousand. These are 
the contents of the chapters called Parva 
Sangraha in the Bharata . 

Sauti said 

379. Eighteen Akshauhinis of soldiers as¬ 
sembled to fight and the battle raised for 
eighteen days. 

380. He who is learned in the four Vedas 
with all the Angas and Upanishadas , but 
does not know this history, cannot be consi¬ 
dered to be wise. 

381. The greatly intelligent Vyasa has 
spoken it as a treatise on Dharma , Artha 
and Kama . 

382. Those who have heard it can never 
listen to other histories, as those who have 
heard the sweet voice of the male Kakila 
(bird) can never listen to the harsh cawing 
of the crows. 


383. As the three worlds have enveloped 
from the five elements, so inspiration of all 
poets proceeds from this excellent work. 

384. O Brahmanas, as the four kinds of 
creatures depend on space for their existence, 
so all the Puranas depend on this history. 

385. As all the senses are dependent on 
the wonderful workings of the mind, so all 
the acts and moral qualities depend on this 
treatise. 

386. As the body depends on the food it 
takes, so all the stories current in the world 
depend on this work. 

387. As servants, willing to have prefer¬ 
ment, always depend on their noble masters, 
so do all poets depend on this Bharata . 

388. As the blessed domestic Asrarna 
cannot be surpassed by the other Asramas, 
so can no poet surpass this poem. 

389. O Rishis, be up and doing. Let 
your hearts be fixed in virtue, for virtue is 
the only friend in the other world. Even the 
most intelligent men can never make their 
wealth and wives their own by carefully 
cherishing them. They are not things 
lasting. 

390. The Bharata, uttered from the lips of 
Dwaipayana is matchless, it is sacred, it is 
virtue itself. It destroys sins and produces 
good. What is the necessity for him, who 
ears it when it is being recited, to bathe in 
the sacred Pushkara ! 

391. Whatever sin is committed in the 
day by a Brahmana through his senses are 
all purged off, if he reads the Bharata in 
the evening. 

392. Whatever sins also he may commit 
in the night by deeds, words or mind 
are ail purged off, if he reads the Bharata 
in the first twilight of the morning. 

393. He who gives to a Brahmana, 
learned in the Vedas and other sciences, 
one hundred cows with their horns plated 
with gold, and he who listens daily to the 
sacred histories of the Bharata , gain equal 
merit. 

394. As the wide ocean can be easily 
crossed by men having boats, so this 
extensive history of great excellence and 
deep meaning can be understood by the 
help of this Section which is called Parva - 
Sangraha; 

thus ends the Section second Parva - 
Sangraha in the Adiparva of the blessed 
'Mahabharata . 


Section 3

( PAUSHYA PARVA.) 

Sauti said 

1. The son of Parikshit, Janamejaya, 
with his brothers, was attending his long 
sacrifice in the field of Kurukshetra. 

2. His brothers were three, namely,— 
Srutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhimasena. 
When they were sitting at the sacrifice, 
there came the son of Sarama. 

3., He, being belaboured by the brothers 
of Janamejaya, went to his mother weeping. 

4. His mother, seeing him weep, asked 
him, “Why are you weeping, who has beaten 
you?’ 

5. Being thus questioned, he replied to 
his mother, “ I have been beaten by the 
brothers of Janamejaya.” 

6. And then his mother said, “You must 
have committed some fault, for which you 
have been beaten.” 

7. He replied, “I committed no fault. 
I did not drink the sacrificial ghee, I did 
not cast even a look at it.” 

8. Hearing this her mother, being very 
sorry for the affliction of his son, went to the 
place where Janamejaya with his brothers 
were attending his long sacrifice. 

9. She angrily addressed Janamejaya 
thus, “My son did not commit any fault. He 
did not drink your sacrificial ghee, he did 
not even look at it. Why did you then 
beat him ? ” 

10. They did not (condescend) to reply 
to her. On this she said, “ As you beat my 
son who did commit no fault, so will evil 
come to you when you least expect it.” 

11. Janamejaya, having been thus cursed 
by the celestial bitch Sarama, was very 
much alarmed and dejected. 

12. After finishing the sacrifice, he 
returned to Hastinapur and took great pains 
to find out a priest who could neutralise the 
effect of the curse by procuring absolution 
from his sin. 

13. Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, 
when out in hunting, saw in one part of his 
dominion a holy hermitage, 

14. Where lived a Rishi, named Sruta- 
srava ; he had a son who was named Som- 
srava, who was deeply engaged in austere 
penances. 

15. Being desirous to make the son of 
the Rishi his priest, Janamejaya, 

16. Saluted him and said, “O Vagabana, 
allow your son to be my priest.” 

17. Addressed by Janamejaya, the Rishi replied, “O Janamejaya, 
my son is accomplished in the study of the 
Vedas, endued with my full asceticism, and 
deep in devotion, but he is born in the womb 
of a serpent who swallowed my vital fluid. 

18. “He is able to absolve you from all 
sins except those committed against Mahadeva. 

19. But he observes a particular rule,— 
namely he grants to a Brahmana whatever 
he asks from him. If you can allow him 
to do it, you can then take him.” 

20. Janamejaya thus addressed by the 
Rishi, said “It shall be as you say.” 

21. He then took him as his priest and 
returned to his capital. He then addressed 
his brothers thus, “I have chosen this person 
as my priest. Whatever he will command 
to do must be obeyed by you without 
questioning.” 

22. The brothers did as they were 
requested. Giving these instructions to his 
brothers he marched against Takshasila 
and conquered that country. 

23. About this time there was also a 
Rishi, named Ayuda-Dhotrmya. He had 
three disciples, namely Upamanyu, Aruni, 
and Veda. 

24. One day the Rishi asked onfe of 
these three disciples, Aruni of Panchala, to 
go and stop a breach in the water-course 
in his field. 

25. thus ordered by the preceptor, 
Aruni of Panchala went to the spot, but 
could not stop the breach. 

26. He was very sorry that he 
could not carry out his preceptor's bidding, 
but at last he saw a means, and he said, 
“ I shall do it in this way.” 

27. He entered into the breach, and 
there laid himself down, and thus the 
water was stopped. 

28. Sometimes after, the preceptor Ayuda- 
Dhoumya enquired of his other disciples 
where Aruni of Panchala was. 

29. Having been thus addressed, they 
replied, “Sir, he has been sent by you to 
stop the breach of the water-course in the 
field.” Dhoumya, thus reminded, said 
to his pupils, “ Let us all go to the place 
where he is.” 

30. Having gone there, he cried, “ O 
Aruni of Panchala, where are you ? Come 
here, my child.” 

31. Having heard the voice of his pre¬ 
ceptor, Aruni rose speedily from the breach 
and stood before him, 



32. Addressing his preceptor Aruni 
said, “I was in the breach of the water¬ 
course. Having been unable to stop it by 
any other means, I entered myself into the 
breach to prevent the water from running out. 
It is only when I heard your horour’s voice 
that I have left it, and allowed the wate s to 
escape. I salute you, great teacher, tell me 
what I am to do now." 

33. The preceptor, thus addressed, said, 
As you have opened the water-course in 
fretting from the ditch, you shall be henceforth 
known as Uddalaka as a mark of your 
preceptor’s favour. 

34. And as you have obeyed my com¬ 
mand, You shall obtain good fortune. 

35. All the Vedas will shine in you, and 
so will all the Dharma Sastras .” 

36. Being thus blessed by his preceptor, 
Aruni went away to the country where his 
heart longed to go. The name of another 
Ayuda Dhoumya’s disciples was Upa- 
manyu. 

37. Him the preceptor thus addressed, 
“Go, my child, look after my kine." 

38. As ordered by his preceptor, he went 
to look after the cows. Having tend 
them all day, he came back to the preceptor's 
house in the evening. He then stood 
before him and respectfully saluted him. 

39. His preceptor, seeing him in the best 
of health, asked, "Upamanyu, my child, by 
what means you support yourself ? You are 
exceedingly plump ?" 

40. He answered to his preceptor, "I 
support myself by begging." 

41. The preceptor said, "You should not 
appropriate what you receive by begging 
without offering it to me." Being thus told 
he went away and offered all that he got 
by begging to his preceptor; 

42. And the preceptor took from him all 
that he got. He, being thus treated, went 
away to look after the cattle. And after 
having tend them all day he came back in 
the evening. He stood before his preceptor 
and respectfully saluted him. 

43. The preceptor, seeing him still as 
plump as before, said, "Upamanyu, my 
child, l take from you all that you get by 
begging. How do you contrive to support 
yourself now ?" 

44. Being thus qustioned, he answered 
to his preceptor, "Sir, after giving you all I 
get by begging, I go again to beg to sup¬ 
port myself." 

45. The preceptor, said "This is not the 
way you should obey your preceptor. You 
diminish the support of others who live by 
begging. Having thus supported yourself 
you have showed that you are cove- 
teous." 

46. Having assented to all his preceptor’s 
words, he went away (again) to tend the kine. 
Having done it, he stood before the 
preceptor and respectfully saluted him. 

47. His preceptor saw that he was still 

plump and said, " Upamanyu, my child, I take 
from you all that you get by begging. You 
do not also go out begging for the second 
time. How do you now manage to support 
yourself?” 

48. Upamanyu, thus questioned, replied, 
“Sir, I now support myself with the milk of 
these cows." Hearing which the preceptor 
said, "It is not proper for you to drink the 
milk without first asking my consent." 

49. He assented to his preceptor’s word s 
and went to tend the cattle. Having done 
it he stood before his preceptor and 
respectfully saluted him. 

50. The preceptor saw that he was still 
fat, and he asked, "Upamanyu my child, 
you do not support yourself by alms, nor do 
you go begging for the second time, nor 
do you drink the milk of my cows, but you 
are still fat, how do you support yourself 
now?" 

51. thus questioned he said, "I now drink 
the froth that the calves throw out when they 
suck their mothers’ teats." 

52. The preceptor replied, "The good 
calves, out of kindness towards you, throw 
out a large quantity of froth. You should 
not stand in the way of their full meal. 
Know, it is not proper for you to drink the 
froth." Upamanya assented to this and went 
to tend the cattle. 

53—54. thus prevented by his precep¬ 
tor (from supporting himself,) he did not 
feed on alms, he did not drink the milk 
or taste the froth, he had thus nothing 
to eat. One day being very much oppressed 
by hunger he ate the leaves of Arka tree in 
a forest. His eyes were affected by the 
pungent, acrimonious, crude and saline 
qualities of the leaves, and he became blind. 
When he was thus walking about feeling his 
way he fell into a deep well. 

55. As he did not return that day to the 
Rishi’s house when the sun was sinkfbg 
down behind the summit of the western 
mountain, the preceptor said to his pupils 
that Upamanyu had not yet returned. And 
they replied that he had gone to tend the 
cattle. 

56. On this the preceptor said, "Upamanyu 
is displeased, because he has been prevented 
from the use of every thing. He is, therefore 
making late to come home. Let us
go and find him out.” Having said this, 
he went with his pupils into the forest and 
called aloud. “ Ho, Upamanyu, where 
are you ? My child, come here.” 

57. Having heard the voice of his pre¬ 
ceptor he replied, “I have fallen into this 
well.” The preceptor asked, “ How have 
you fallen into this well ?” 

58. He answered to the preceptor, "I 
have become blind by eating the leaves of 
Arka tree, and thus fallen into this well.” 

59. On this the preceptor replied, “Worship
the twin Aswinas, the physicians of the 
celestials, and he will restore you your sight.” 
thus addressed, Upamanya began to 
worship the twin Aswinas by reciting the following
words from the Rig Veda. 

60—70. “You have existed before the 
creation, O you first-born beings ; you are 
manifest in tnis wonderful universe of five 
elements. You are infinite, you are the course 
of Nature and intelligent Soul that pervaders 
all. I desire to obtain you by the 
knowledge, derived from hearing and meditation. 

You are birds of beautiful feathers, that 
roost on the body which is like to a tree. 
You are free from the three common 
attributes of all souls. You are beyond all 
comparison. You pervade the universe through 
its spirit in every created thing. 

You are golden eagles. You are the 
essence in which all things disappear. You 
are free from error and you do not deteriorate. 
You are of beautiful beaks, which will not 
unjustly wound and which are ever vic¬ 
torious in all fights. Having created the 
sun, you weave the wonderful cloth 
of night and day by the black 
and white threads. You have established
with the cloth thus woven two courses 
of action ; one regarding the Devas, and the 
other regarding the Pitris. You set free the 
bird of life, seized by Time representing the 
infinite soul, so that it may be delivered to 
great happiness. Those that are greatly 
ignorant on account of the delusion of their 
senses, think that vou, who have no attributes 
of matter, have forms. 

Three hundred and sixty cows as repre¬ 
sented by three hundred and sixty days 
give birth to one calf which is year. This 
calf is the creator and destroyer of all. Those 
that search after truth, through following diff¬ 
erent routes, draw the milk of true know¬ 
ledge with its help. 

The year is a nave of the wheel 
with seven hundred and twenty spokes, 
representing as many days. The circumference 
 of tnis wheel is without an end and 
is represented by twelve months. This 
wheel is full of delusion and docs not know 


deterioration. It affects all creatures belonging 
to this or the other world. O Aswinas, 
set this wheel in motion. 

The wheel of Time represented by 
the year has also a nave, the six seasons. 
It has twelve spokes represented by the 
twelve signs of the Zodiac. This wheel of 
Time displays the fruits of all beings’ actions. 
The Presiding Deities of Time obey this 
wheel. 

Bound as I am to its bond, O 
Ashwinas, make me free from this wheel of 
Time. O Aswinas, you are this universe 
of five elements. You are the objects that 
are enjoyed in this and the next world. 
Raise me beyond the influence of the five 
elements. You are the supreme Brahma, but 
you move on earth in forms and enjoy that 
pleasures that the senses give. 

You created ten points of the uni¬ 
verse in the begining of the creation. You 
have placed the sun and the moon above. 
The Rishis perform their Yagmas according 
to the course of the sun. The celestials 
and men also perform their Yagmas as 
settled for them, and they enjoy the.fruits of 
those acts. 

Mixing the ten colors, you have 
produced all the objects of sight. The 
universe has sprung from these objects in 
which both the celestials and men and all 
creatures endued with life are engaged 
in their respective works. O Aswinas, I 
worship you. I also worship the sky that is 
your handi-work. 

You are the ordainers of the fruits of 
all acts from which even the celestials are 
not free ; you are, however, free from the 
fruits of your actions. You are the 
parents of all. You as males and females 
swallow the food which subsequently 
developes into the vital-fluid and blood. The 
new-born babe sucks her mother’s breast, 
it is you who take the shape of the babe. 
O Aswinas, restore my sight and protect 
my life.” 

ji. When Upamanyu thus adored the 
twin Aswinas, they appeared and said 
“ We are pleased with your devotion. Here 
is a cake for you. Take it and eat it.” 

72. thus addressed he replied, ' O 
Aswinas, your words never prove untrue. 
But I cannot take this cake without offering 
it to my preceptor.” 

73. The Aswinas said,—“ Your preceptor 
also once invoked us, we gave him a cake 
and he took it without offering it to his 
teacher. Do what your preceptor did.” 

74. thus addressed he said, “ O 
Aswinas, I ask your pardon. I cannot take 
this cake without offering it to my preceptor. 

75. The Aswinis said, "We are pleased 
with your this devotion to your preceptor. 
Your teacher’s teeth are of black iron, yours 
will be those of gold. Your sight will be 
restored and you will possess good fortune.’ 1 

76. Having been thus addressed by the 
Aswinis he regained his sight. He then 
went to his preceptor, saluted him and told 
him all that had happened. And his 
preceptor was very much pleased with him 
and told him that he would obtain immense 
prosperity as the Aswinis had said. 

77. All the Vedas will shine on him and 
so also all Dharma Sastras . This was his 
trial. 

78. The other pupil of Ayudha Dhaumya 
was called Veda. One day his preceptor 
addressed him thus, “ Veda, my child, 
remain in my house and serve your teacher. 
It will be to your profit.” 

79. Veda, having assented to it, remained 
long in the family of his preceptor, being 
always mindful to serve him. Like an ox 
under the burden of his owner, he bore 
heat and cold, hunger and thirst, without any 
complaint at all trines; and many years thus 
passed before his preceptor was satisfied. 

80. Veda obtained good fortune and 
universal knowledge as the result of his 
preceptor’s satisfaction. This was his trial. 

81. Having received his preceptor’s 
permission he left his house after the 
completion of living at his house and entered 
the domestic mode o life. 

82. When he wa.j living in his house he 
got three pupils. But he never asked them 
to perform any work or to serve him in any 
way. 

83. Having himself suffered much woe 
when living in the family of his preceptor, 
he did not like to treat his pupils with 
severity. 

84. Once on a time both the kings 
Janamejaya and Paushya came to his house and 
appointed him as their preceptor. 

85. One day when he was going to 
depart on a sacrificial business, he employed 
one of his pupils, named Uttanka, to look 
after his house and family. 

86. He said, “Uttanka, whatever should 
be required to be done in my house, let it 
be done by you without neglect.” Having 
given him these instructions, Veda went 
away on his journey. 

87. Uttanka. being always mindful of the 
service, as asked by his preceptor, lived in the 
family of his teacher. While he was staying 
there, the females of his precentor’s house 
assembled near him and addressed him 
thus. 


88 . “O Uttanka, the wife of your preceptor
is in the state in which she might bear a 
child. Your preceptor is absent, therefore 
you are requested to stand in his place and 
do what is needful.” 

89. Uttanka, having been thus addressed 
said to the women, “It is not proper for 
me to do it at the request of women. I have 
not been asked by my preceptor to do  
anything which is not proper.” 

90. Some time after, his preceptor returned 
ed from his journey. He heard all that had 
happened and was much pleased. 

91. He said, “Uttanka, my child, what 
favour may 1 bestow on you ? I have been 
properly and faithfully served by you. Our 
friendship for each other has, therefore, 
increased. I grant you permission to go. 
Depart and let your wishes be fulfilled.” 

92. Uttanka, thus addressed, replied
“Let me do something which you wish to 
be done. 

93. It is said, he who bestows 
instructions, but does not receive Dakskina, and 
he who receives it without giving Dakskina 
—contrary to usage—one of these two dies,, 
and bitter enmity is created between them. 

94. I, w’ho have got your permission to 
go, wish to bring some Dakskina for you.” 
On hearing this,, his preceptor said, “
Uttanka, my child then wait some time.” 

95. Some time after, Uttanka again said" 
to his preceptor, “ Command me to bring 
whaC you wish to have as Dakskina.

96. His Preceptor then said, “ My 
beloved Uttanka, you have repeatedly ex¬ 
pressed your desire to bring something as 
an acknowledgement of the instructions you 
have received from me. Go to your mis¬ 
tress and ask her what you will bring for 
Dakskina .” thus directed by his pre¬ 
ceptor, Uttanka went to his teacher’s wife 
and said, “ Madam, I have received per¬ 
mission of my preceptor to depart, and 
1 am desirous to bring some thing that 
would be agreeable to >ou as my Dakskina 
for the instruction 1 have received, so that 
I may be free from my debt of gratitude.” 

97. “therefore, command me what am 
I to bring as Dakskina His preceptress, 
thus addressed, said, “ Go to king Paushya 
and beg from him the ear-rings that are 
worn by his queen 

98. “ And bring them here. Four days 
hence is a sacred day; on that day I wish to 
appear before the Brahmanas and distri¬ 
bute their food wearing those ear-rings. 
Do this, O Uttanka. if you be success¬ 
ful, good fortune will be yours. If not, what 
good can you expect ?” 


99. thus ordered Uttanka took his 
departure. When he was passing along the 
road he ineL with an extraordinary Targe 
bull and a man of extraordinary large 
stature riding on it. The man addressed 
Uttanka thus. 

100. “O Uttanka, eat the dung of this 
bull.” But Uttanka was not willing to eat 
it. 

101. The man again said, “O Uttanka, 
eat it without hesitation. Your teacher ate 
it before.” 

102. When he was thus addressed, he 
expressed his willingness (to eat,) and ate 
the dung and drank the urine of the bull, and 
then respectfully rose and washed his hands 
as he went on. 

103. He arrived at the palace of king 
Paushya who was seated on his throne. 
Uttanka went to him and saluted him ; and 
pronouncing blessings said, 

104. 4 ‘I have come to you and stand 
before you a petitioner.” King Paushya, 
returning his salutations said, “Sir, wnat 
shall I do for you ?” 

105. Uttanka replied, "1 have come to 
beg from you your queen’s ear-rings as a 
Dakshina to be given to my preceptor. 
You should give me those ear-rings.” 

- 106. King Paushya said,—“Go into the 
inner-apartment, and ask it from the queen.” 
He went there, but could not see her. 

107. He again said to the king, “You 
should not deceitfully treat me Your 
queen is not in the inner-apartment and 
l could not find her,” 

108 Paushya thought for a while and 
then replied, “Carefully recollect, Sir, whe¬ 
ther you arc defiled with the impurities of a 
repast. The queen is a chaste woman, and 
therefore she cannot be seen by one who is 
defiled by the impurities of a repast. She 
does not appear before one who is so de¬ 
filed.” 

109. Uttanka, thus addressed, thought 
for a while and then replied, “Yes, it is so. 
As 1 was in a hurry, I performed my ablu¬ 
tions when I was walking.” Paushya 
said, “This is a transgression. Ablutions 
can not properly be performed standing or 
Walking in a hurry.” 

110. Uttanka assented to what fell from 
the king and sat with his face turned to¬ 
wards the east. He washed his hands and 
feet thoroughly. He then without sound 
inrice sipped water which was free from' 
scum and froth and whigh was not tfarm. 
He took only so much of it as to reach his 
stomach. He then wiped his face twice. He 
then touched his eye, ears &c v with water. 


Having done all this he again went to the 
inner-apartment. 

in. He saw the ouoen this time. See 
ing him, she saluted him reverentially and 
said, “Welcome, Sir ; command me what 1 
shall do for you.” 

112. Uttanka said to her, “You should 
give me your ear-rings. 1 beg them from you 
as I wish to present them to my preceptor.' 
The queen, having been highly pleased 
with the conduct or Uttanka, thought that 
he was a very good man and he could 
not be refused. therefore, she took off her 
ear-rings and handed them over to him. 
On giving them to Uttanka she said, “These 
ear-rings are very much sought after by 
Takshaka, the King of the Nagas. There¬ 
fore take them with the greatest care.” 

113. Uttanka, being thus told, replied 
to the queen, “Madam, you need not be 
under any apprehension. Takshaka, the 
king of the Nagas, cannot overcome me.” 

114. Having said this, he took leave of 
the queen and went back to the king, whom 
he addressed thus, “Paushya, I am much 
pleased.” Paushya replied, 

115. “A proper man on whom charity 
can be bestowed is got at long intervals. 
You are a guest with many qualifications, 
therefore I wish to perform a SradJt . Kindly 
wait a little.” 

116. Uttanka said, “Yes, I shall wait. 
Bring soon the provisions that are ready,’' 
The king, having signified his assent, duly 
entertained Uttanka. 

117. Uttanka, seeing that the food that 
was brought before him was cold and 
had hair in it, considered it unclean, and 
said to Paush3'a, “You give me food that is 
not clean, therefore you will lose your 
sight.” 

118. Paushya replied, 14 As you impute 
undeanliness to the food which is clean, you 
will be without a child.” Uttarika said» 

119. “It is not proper for you to curse 
me after having given me unclean food. 
You can satisfy yourself by occular proof. 
ITiereupon Pausnya by seeing it personally 
satisfied himself that the food was undean. 

120. Having seen that the food was 
really unclean, cold and mixed with hair,— 
because it was prepared by a woman whose 
hair was not braided,Paushya began to 
pacify the Rishi Uttanka, saying, 

r2i. “Sir, the food placed before you is 
cold and his really hair in it, having been 
prepared without suffident care. therefore, 
f pray yon, kindly pardon me. Let me not 
become blind.” Uttanka replied, 

122. “What you say must happen. Having 
become blind, von may however regain your 
sight soon. Grant also that your curse on 
me may not take effect." 

123. Paushya said, “ I am not capable 
of revoking my curse. My anger is not 
appeased even now. But you do not know 
it. 

t24. Bramhana’s heart is as soft as 
butter even though his words are like sharp 
tazors. But contrary is the case with the 
Kshatriya. His words are as soft as 
butter, but his heart is like a sharp instru¬ 
ment 

125 Such being the case, I cannot revoke 
my curse, as my heart is very hard. Vou 
may go.” Uttanka replied, “I showed you 
the uncleanliness of the food placed before 
me. I am also pacified by you. 

126. Besides you said that I should be 
without issue, because I falsely imputed 
toncleanliness to the food. The food, being 
really unclean, your curse cannot take effect. 
I am sure of it.” 

127. Uttanka, having said this, went 
away with the ear-rings. On his way he 
saw a naked beggar, coming towards him. 
He was sometimes coming in view and some¬ 
times disappearing. 

128. Uttanka, having occasion to have 
some water, placed the ear-rings on the 
ground and went for it. In the mean time 
the beggar came quickly to the place and 
taking up the ear-rings ran away. 

129. Having completed his ablutions 
and purified himself, and having bowed 
down to the divinities and spiritual masters, 
he ran after the thief as fast as possible. 

130. Having overtaken him, he seized 
him with all his might, but the disguised 
Takshaka, suddenly quitting the form of the 
beggar, assumed his own real form, and 
quickly disappeared into a large hole in the 
ground. 

131. Entering the region of the Nagas, 
he proceeded to his own home. Uttanka, 
remembering the words of the queen, 
pursued Takshaka. 

132. He began to dig open the hole with 
a stick, but did not make much progress. 
Seeing his distress Indra sent his thunderbolt
to his assistance. 

133. Saying, “ Go and help that 
Brahmana .” The thunderbolt entering into fche 
stick enlarged the hole. 

134. Uttanka entered into the hole after 
the thunderbolt; and thus entering it he saw 
the land of the Nagas, with hundreds of 
palaces, elegant mansions, with turrets and 
domes, and gateways, with wonderful arenas 
for various games and entertainments. 

135. To please the Nagas, he uttered 
the following slokas, M O serpents, subjects 
of the king Airavata, you are brilliant in 
battles, you shower weapons like clouds, 
charged with lightning and driven by 
wind. 

136. Beautiful, variously formed, decked 
with many colored ear-rings, O children of 
Airavata, you shine like the sun in the 
sky. 

137. There are many settlements of 
Nagas or. the northern banks of the Ganges, 
and there do I often worship the great 
Nagas. 

138. Who but Airavata can desire to 
move in the burning sun ? When Dhrita 
rastra goes out, twenty eight thousand 
Nagas follow him. 

139. I salute you all that have Airavata 
for their elder brother,—whether you live 
near him or stay at a distance from him. 

140. In order to get back my ear-rings 
I worship you, Takshaka, the Naga-king, 
who formerly lived in Kurukshetra and the 
forest of Khandhava. 

141. Takshaka and Ashwasena were 
constant companions when they lived in 
Kurukshetra on the hanks of the river 
Ihskuntati, 

142. I also worship Takshaka’s younger 
brother Srutasena, who dwelt at the holy 
place called Mahadyumna with the inten¬ 
tion of becoming one of the chiefs of the 
Nagas.” 

143. After having thus saluted the chief 
Nagas, the Brahmana Rishi Uttanka did 
not get his ear-rings ; and he became very 
thoughtful. 

144. When he saw that he did not get 
the ear-rings, although he had worshipped 
the Nagas, he looked around him and be¬ 
held two women working in a loom with a 
fine shuttle and weaving a piece of doth- 
There were black and white threads in the 
loom. He also saw a wheel, with twelve 
spokes, which was turned round by six bdys. 
He also saw a man with a horse. In „ order 
to please them all he uttered the follow¬ 
ing Mantras. 

145. “ This wheel, the circumference of 
which is marked by twenty-four divisions, 
representing twenty-four lunar changes; 
contains three hundred spokes.- It is conti¬ 
nually set in motion by six boys. 

146. These maidens, representing 
universe, are continually weaving aclpth with 
white and black threads, creating innumer¬ 
able worlds and millions of beings to-inhabit 
them. 

147. O, the master of thunder, the pro¬ 
tector of the universe, the stayer of Vitra 
and Namuchi, . O illustrious one, wearing 
the black cloth, O Deity, who displays truth 
and untruth in the universe, 

148. Who owns the horse that was 
obtained from the depths of the ocean and 
which is but another form of Agni,—I bow to 
you, O supreme being, O Lord of the three 
worlds, O Purandara. 

140. Then said the man with the horse, 
" I have been much pleased with your 
adoration. What good can I do to you ?" 

. 150. Uttanka replied,' 1 Let the Nagas 
be brought under my power." The man 
then said, 44 Blow into this horse." 

 151. Thereupon Uttanka blew into the 
horse, and thousands of flames and fires 
with smoke issued forth from every aperture 
of the horse thus blown into. 

t52. The land of the Nagas was at the 
point of being burnt down wnen Takshaka, 
taking the ear-rings, hastened to Uttanka, 
from his palace and said, 

153.  Pray, Sir, take back your ear¬ 
rings.  Receiving back his ear-rings 
Uttanka thought, 

 154. 44 To-day is the sacred day men¬ 

tioned by my preceptress. I am at a dis¬ 
tance,—how can I, therefore, show my 
regard for her (by presenting her with 
the ear-rings) !" When he was thus me¬ 
ditating the man said, 

155. 44 Uttanka, get on this horse. He 
will take you in a moment to the family 
of your preceptor." 

156. Uttanka signified his assent, moun¬ 
ted the horse and reached his preceptor's 
house in a moment's time. The preceptress, 
after bathing, was dressing her hair, sitting 
and thinking that if Uttanka did not come, 
she would curse him. 

137. At this very time Uttanka entered 
the house of his preceptor and made proper 
salutation t© his preceptress. When he pre¬ 
sented her with the ear-rings, she said. 

138. 44 Uttanka, you have come at the 
proper time. Welcome, my child. As you 
arc innocent, I do not curse you. Good 
fortune will come to you. Let your wishes 
be crowned with success." 

159. Then did Uttanka salute his preceptor
and his preceptor said,  Uttanka, 
my child, welcome to you. What made 
you to be so long away V ' 

i$o. Uttanka replied to the preceptor, 
•'The king of the Nagas, Takshaka, 
offered obstruction to the business went, and 
therefore I had to go to the land of the 
Nagas. 


161. There I saw two maidens working 
in a loom and weaving a cloth with blade 
and white threads. What may it be ? 

162. I then saw a wheel, with twelve 
spokes, which was being continually turned 
by six boys. What does it mean f 1 also 
saw a man,—who is he ? I saw also a horse 
of extraordinary sue,—what is that horse ? 

163. On my way I saw on the road a 
man mounted on a bull. He lovingly ad¬ 
dressed me thus,  Uttanka, eat the dung 
of this bull, which was eaten by your pre¬ 
ceptor." 

164. thus requested by him, I ate the 
dung of that bull. Who is this man? 
Being instructed by you I wish to hear all 
about them." 

165. His preceptor thus addressed said 
to him,  The two maidens you saw are 
Dhata and Bidhata . The black and white 
threads represent night and day. The wheel, 
with twelve spokes turned by six boys, is 
the year, having six seasons. 

166. The man is Parjany a (the deity of 
rain); the horse is Agni, (deity of fire). 
The bull which you saw on the road is the 
Airavata, the king of elephants. 

167. The man who rode it is Indra. 
The dung of the Bull, which you ate is 
Ambrosia. Certainly on account of this 
(eating) you were not slain in the land of 
the Nagas. 

168. Indra, with six attributes, is my 
friend ; he, being moved by kindness to¬ 
wards you, showed you this favour ; there¬ 
fore, you have been able to return safely 
with the ear-rings. 

169. Now, mild-natured Uttanka, I give 
you permission to go. You will obtain 

ood fortune." Uttanka, thus obtaining 
is preceptor’s leave, and being deadly 
angry against Takshaka, went towards 
Hastinapur, resolved to take revenge on the 
king. 

170. The good Brahmana's son reached 
Hastinapur. Uttanka then went to see king 
Janamejaya, 

171. Who had only recently returned 
victorious from Takshasila. He saw him 
seated surrounded by his ministers. 

172. He uttered blessings in proper time 
and addressed him in speech of correct 
accent and melodious sound. 

Uttanka said 

173. O best of kings, you are spending 
your time like a child when a most important
matter urgently demands your attention.


Sauti said 

174. Having been thus addressed by 
the Brahmana, king Janamejaya duly 
saluted him and said to the best of 
Brahmanas. 

Janamejaya said 

175. I perform the duties of my 
Kshatriya race, by looking after my these
subjects. Tell me what is the business that 1 
am to perform and by which you are led 
to come here. 

Sauti said 

276. Having been thus addressed by 
the best of kings, Janamejaya, the best of 
Brahmanas, distinguished for good deeds, 
thus replied, 44 O king, the business is your 
own that demands your attention. therefore 
do it." 

XJttanka said 

177. O king of kings, your father was 
killed by Takshaka, therefore take revenge 
on that vile serpent for the death of your 
noble father. 

178. The time has come, I say, for your 
taking vengance, ordained by Fate. Go, 
O king, and avenge the death of your 
noble father, 

179. Who was unoffending, but who 
died like a tree stricken by thunder, having 
been bitten by this vile serpent. 

180. The worst of the serpent race, 
Takshaka, being intoxicated with power, 
committed an wicked act when he bit your 
father. 

181. Wicked in his deeds, he even made 
Kashyapa run away when he was coming for 
the relief of your god-like father, the 
protector of the race of royal usages. 

182. It is proper for you to bum the 
wicked wretch in the blazing fire of a 
Snake-Sacrifice. therefore, O king, soon 
do the needful for it. 

183. You can thus revenge your father's 
death. O king, you can thus do me a great 
favour. 

184. O king of the world, my business 
was obstructed on one occasion by that 
wretch when ! was going (to get a present 
for my preceptor.) 

8onti said:— 

185. The King, having heard these 
words, got angry on Takshaka. Uttan¬ 
ka’s speech inflamed him as ghee does the 
sacrificial fire. 

186. Even before the presence of Uttanka, 
be sorrowfully asked his ministers the particulars
of his father's going to heaven (death). 


187. When he heard all the circum¬ 
stances of his father's death, the king of kings 
was overecome with sorrow and pain. 

thus ends the third Section , Paushya , 
in the Adi Parva of the blessed 
Mahabharata . 

Section 4
***
(PAULAMA PARVA). 

1. Lomharshana's son Ugrasrava Sauti, 
well-read in the Puranas, being present at 
the twelve years’ sacrifice of Kulapati 
Saunaka in the forest of Naimisha, stood 
before the Kish is in attendance. 

2. Having read the Puranas with great 
pains he was very learned in them. Now 
with joined hands he addressed them thus, 
“What, Reverend Sirs, do you wish to hear ? 
What am 1 to relate ?" 

3. The Rishis replied, O son of 
Lomaharshana, we shall ask you, and you will 
relate to us, who are anxious to hear, some 
excellent stories. 

4. But noble Kulapati Saunaka' is now 
engaged in the room of the holy fire. 

5. He knows the divine stories relating 
to the Devas and Asuras. He also knows 
the stories relating to men, Nagas and 
Gandharvas. 

6. O Sauti, that Kulapati Brahmana is 
the chief in this sacrifice ; he is able, faithful 
to his vows, wise, and a master of the 
Sastras and Aranyakas. 

7. He is truthful, a lover of peace, a 
Rishi of hard austerities, and an observer of 
the ordained penances. 

8. He is respected by all of us and we 
should, therefore, wait for him. 

9. When he will sit on the highly 
honoured scat for the preceptor, you will 
reply to what that best of tne twice-born 
will ask you.' 

Sauti said 

10. So be it. When the noble Rishi 
will be seated, I shall relate sacred stones 
relating to variety of subjects as I shall be 
asked by him. 

11. The best of Brahmanas (Saunaka), 
after having performed all his duties,- 
having adored the divinities with prayers 
and the Pitris by offering water,—-came 
back to the place of sacrifice where Sauti 
was seated before the assembly of Rishis of 
rigid vows. 

12. When Saunaka was seated in the 
midst of Rishis and Sadhus who
had come to their places, Sauti spoke as 
follows

thus ends tilt fourth chapter, Katha  
pravesha, in the Adi Parva. 


Section 5

( PAULAMA PARVA.) 

Saunaka said:— 

t. Your father read the whole of the 
Puranas in the days of yore. O Son of 
Lomharshana, have you also made them 
your study? 

2. There are in the Puranas interesting 
stories and the history of the first  
generations of the wise mein We have heard them 
all recited by your father. 

3. I am desirous of hearing the history 
of the Brigu race. Tell us that history. 
We art all attention to listen to you. 

Sauti said 

4. That which was formerly studied by 
the noble Brahmanas, which was studied 
and narrated by Vaishampayana, 

5—6. Which was also studied by my 
father! has been acquired by me. Hear 
with all attention, O descendant of the 
Brigu race, the history of your race, res¬ 
pected by Indra and all the celestials, all 
the Rishis and the Marutas. In this great 
race the great and blessed Rishi Brigu was 
born. 

7-8. I shall properly relate, O great 
Rishi, the history of this race, as it is in the 
Puranas. We are told that great Brigu 
was begotten by self-existing Brahma from 
the fire at Varuna’s sacrifice. Brigu had a 
beloved son, named Chyavana. 

9. Chyavana had a virtuous son, named 
Pramati. He had a son, named Ruru by 
Ghritachi. 

10. Raru had a son by his wife Pramad- 
vara. O Saunaka, he was your grand¬ 
father ; he was very virtuous and greatly 
learned in the Yedas. 

11. He was devoted to asceticism, had 
great repute, was learned in the Sruti, 
truthful, virtuous, well-regulated in his meals 
and was the. most eminent amongst the 
Teamed in the Vedas. 

Saunaka said 

12 O Son of Suka, why was the illustrious 
son of Vrjgu named Chyavana ? I ask 
you, tell me an about it. 

Sauti replied 2 — 

13. Brigu had a very beloved wife, 
(named Puloma) who became quick with 
child by him. 

14—15. When the virtuous and chaste 
Puloma was in that condition, one day 
the greatly famous and virtuous Brigu, 
leaving her at home, went to performing 
ablutions. And it was then that a 
Raksha, named Paulama, came to the 
Rishi’s hermitage. 

16. He, having entered into the 
hermitage, saw the irreproachable wife of 
Brigu. Seeing her he was filled with lust 
and lost his reason. 

17. Seeing that a guest had come, 
beautiful Puloma, entertained him with roots 
and fruits of the wood. 

18. O Rishi, the Raksha, having seen 
her, burnt in lust. He was very much delighted 
and he determined to carry away the 
irreproachable lady. 

19. He said, “ My desire is fulfilled. So 
saying he seized that beautiful lady, and 
carried her away. And in fact that lady of 
captivating smiles, was formerly betrothed 
to the Raksha by her father. 

20. But he afterwards gave her away to 
the Rishi Brigu in due rites. Since then, O
descendant of the Brigu race, this wound 
rankled deep in the heart of the Raksha.

21. He thought this was a very good 
opportunity to carry the lady away. Then 
he entered into the room of the noly fire 
where it was brightly burning. 

22. The Raksha asked the burning 
fire, “O Agni ! tell me whose rightful wife 
this lady is. 

23. You, O Agni, is the mouth of celestials
; tell me, I ask you. This beautiful 
lady was formerly betrothed to me ; 

24. But her father subsequently gave her 
to the vile Brigu. ( Tell me truly ) if she 
can be truly called the wife of Brigu. 

25. As I have found her alone in the 
hermitage, I am determined to carry her 
away by force. My heart burns with rage 
when I think that Brigu has obtained this 
beautiful woman who was betrothed to me. 

26. thus did the Raksha ask the flaming 
fire again and again, whether the lady 
was Brigu’s wife. 

27. “O Agni, you always dwell irt 
every creature as the witness of their piety 
and impiety. Answer my question truth¬ 
fully. 

24. Bhrigu has appropriated her who 
was chosen by me as my wife. Tell me 
truly therefore, whether she is not truly my 
wife by first choice. 

29. Hearing from you whether she is 
Brigu’s wife or not, I shall carry her away 
from the hermitage even before your presence 
. therefore, answer me truthfully.” 

Sauti said 

30. Having heard his words, the seven 
flamed Deity felt himself very much in diffi¬ 
culty. He was afraid to tell an untruth and 
was equally afraid of Brigu’s curse. He at 
last slowly said. 

Agni said 

31. 44 O Raksha, it is true that this 
Puloma was first betrothed to you, but she 
was not taken by you with ( the necessary ) 
holy rites and invocations. 

32. And her father gave this famous 
Puloma to Brigu in gift. He did not give 
her to you. 

33. O Raksha, she was duly taken 
by Brigu as his wife in my presence with 
all the Vedic rites. 

34. This is she, I cannot tell a falsehood. 
O best of Rakshas, falsehood is never res¬ 
pected in this world. 

thus ends the fifth Section , Paulama 
in the Adi Parva . 

Section 6

(PAULAMA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti said:— 

1. O Brahman, having heard these 
words of Agni, the Raksha assumed the 
form of a boar and carried her away as fast 
as the wind or the mind. 

2. The child, of Brigu, who was in her 
womb, was very much enraged at this vio¬ 
lence, and he dropped down from his 
mother's womb. For this reason he got the 
name of Chyavana. 

3. On seeing that the child had dropped 
from her mother's womb as shinning as the 
sun, he quitted the grasp of the lady. But 
he fefl down and was burnt to ashes. 

4. O descendant of Brigu, the beautiful 
PuJocna, being afflicted with grief, took up 
her child Chyavana and walked away. 

5- The Grandfather of all beings, Brahma 
himself saw the faultless wife of Brigu 
weeping with eyes full of tears. 

6. The Grandfather of all beings, noble 
Brahma consoled his own daughter-in -law 
(Puloma), and a great river was formed 
from the tears that ieU from her eyes. 

7 S- The river followed the foot-steps of 
the wife of the great Rishi Brigu; and the 


Grandfather of the, worlds, seeing it follow 
the path of his son’s wife, named it himself 
He called it Vadhusara , and it passed by 
the hermitage of Chyavana. 

9. In this way was born Chyavana. 
the son of Brigu of great power. And 
Brigu saw his son Chyavana and his beautiful
mother. He asked his wife Puloma in 
a rage, 

Brigu said 

10. Who made you known to the Raksha 
resolved to carry you away ? O lady 
of captivating smites, he could not (himself) 
know you to be my wife. 

11. Tell me who it was that told the 
Raksha of you, so that I may curse him 
from anger. 

Puloma said:— 

12. O Lord, I was made known to the 
Raksha by Agni. He carried me away 
weeping like the Kurari. 

13. I was rescued only by the extraordi¬ 
nary brightness of your son. The Raksha 
quitted his grasp, and falling to the ground, 
was turned into ashes. 

Sauti said 

14. Having heard this from Puloma 
Brigu became exceedingly angry, and out of 
anger he cursed Agni, saying, Be an all-
devouring (element). 

44 thus ends the sixth chapter, “Curse
on Agni” in the Adi Parva . 


Section 7

(PAULAMA PARVA)

Sauti said 

1. thus being cursed by Brigu, Agm 
said in anger, What do you mean, O Brah- 
mana, by this rashness that you have shown 
towords me? 

2. What transgression is committed by 
me, who tried to do justice and to speak the 
truth impartially ? Being asked, I told the 
truth. 

3. A witness, who being asked about a 
thing which he knows, says something else 
than what it (really) is, Rurus his ancestors 
and descendants, both to the seventh fltrsr 
alion. 

4. He, who, knowing a thing full well, 
does not disclose what he knows when asked 
is undoubtedly tainted with sin.  

5. I can also curse you, but Brahmanas are
held in respect by me. Although, 
0 Brahmana, these are known to you, I 
shall yet speak them to you. Please 
attend. 

6. Having multiplied myself by Yoga 
power, I am present in many forms. (I am 
present) in the Agnihotra, Yoga, in Karma, 
and in other sacrifices. 

7. The Devas and Pitris appear from 
the ghee that is poured in my flame, according 
 to the ordinances of the Vedas. 

8. The Devas are waters, the Pitris are 
also waters. The Devas have equal rights 
with the Pitris to perform the sacrifices, 
called Darsas and Purnamashas. 

9. therefore the Devas are the Pitris 
and the Pitris are the Devas. They are iden¬ 
tical beings, and they are also separately 
worshipped at Parvas (changes of the 
moon). 

10. The Devas and the Pitris eat what is 
poured upon me. I am, therefore, called 
the mouth of the Devas and the Pitris. 

11. At the new-moon the Pitris, and at 
the full-moon the Devas are fed through my 
mouth with the ghee that is poured on me. 
Being their mouths, how can 1 be the eater 
of all things ?

Sauti said:— 

12. After reflecting for some time, Agni 
withdrew himself from all places in the 
world. (He withdrew himself) from the 
Agnihotra of the twice-born, from Yagma, 
from places of holy rites and from other 
ceremonies. 

13. Being deprived of Oms and Vashats, 
of Swadhas and Swahas, all creatures be¬ 
came very much distressed for want of fire. 

14-15. Thereupon the Rishis went to 
the cfelestials in great anxiety, and address¬ 
ed them thus, “O immaculate beings, the 
three worlds have been confounded at the 
cessation of their sacrifices and ceremonies for 
the loss of fire. therefore, be pleased to do 
the needful There should not be any loss of 
time.’' The celestials and the Rishis then 
went together before the great Brahma. 

16. They told him all about the curse on 
Agni and consequent interruption of all cere¬ 
monies. They said, “ O Mahabhaga, Agni 
has been cursed by Brigu for some reason. 

17. How is it possible for Agni, who is 
0te mouth of the celestials, who eats the 
first part of what is offered in sacrifice, who 
eats also the sacrificial ghee to become the 
diter of every thing promiscuously ?' 

18. The creator of the world having 
heard all this, called Agni to his presence. 
Hesaidpto Agni, who is eternal like him 
and who is creator of all, in gentle words. 


19. “You are the master of all creatures, 
you are their distroyer, you preserve 
the three worlds, you are also the promoter 
of all sacrifices ana ceremonies, 

20. therefore act in a way, so that world's
ceremonies are not interrupted. O the eater 
of sacrificial ghee t you being the Lord of 
all, how have you become so foolish ? 

21. You are always pure in the Universe, 
you are the stay of all creatures. You shall 
not be the eater of all thing with ali your 
body. 

22. O Diety of flames, only the flairies, 
that are in the vilest part of your body, will 
eat all things alike, and the part of your body 
which eats flesh will also eat all things. As 
all things become pure, touched by the sun¬ 
beams, 

23. So will every thing be pure that will 
be burnt in your flames. O Agni, you are 
the supreme energy, born of your own 
power. 

24. By that power, make the Rishi’s 
curse true. Continue to receive your  
portion and that of the celestials offered into 
your mouth.” 

Sauti said:— 

25 Agni then replied to the Grand¬ 
father, “Be it so" and he went away to obey 
the command of the Paramesti (Supreme 
Lord). 

26. The Rishis and the celestials also 
in great delight returned to the place whence 
they went. And the Rishis continued to 
perform their ceremonies and sacrifices as 
before. 

27. The celestials in heaven and all 
creatures on earth were exceedingly rejoiced ; 
and Agni too was rejoiced, beeause he 
became free from the curse. 

28. thus in the days of yore, O possessor of 
the six attributes, was Agni cursed by Brigu. 
Such is the ancient history founded thereon, 
which contains the account of the destruction 
of Paulama and the birth of Chyavana. 

thus ends the seventh Section , Paulama, 
in the Adi P arva. 


Section 8

(PAULAMA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

i. O Brahmana, Chyavana, the son of Brigu 
begat a son on his wife, named Sukanya. 
And son of Sukanya was the illustrious 
and the resplendentlv energetic Pramati, 

. Pramati begot a son called Ruru on 
Ghritachi. Ruru begot a son called Sunaka 
Urt his wife, Pramadvara. 

3 . I shall tell you at length, O Brahmana, 
the history of the resplendently energetic 
Ruru. Listen to it in detail. 

4 tn the days of yore, there was a 
Rishi, named Sthulokesha, who was pos¬ 
sessed of ascetic powers and learning, and 
engaged in doing good to all creatures. 

5. At this time, O Brahmana Rishi, 
Menaka became quick with child by the 
king of the Ghandharvas, named Viswa- 
Vasu. 

6% O Descendant of Brigu, the Apsara 
Menaka, when the time came, delivered her 
child near the hermitage of Sthulokesha. 

7. And, O Brahmana, the cruel and 
shameless Apsara Menaka, after dropping 
the child on the banks of the river, went 
away. 

8—9. The great Rishi saw the girl lying 
forsaken in a lonely place on the banks of 
the river, biasing in beauty; she was as 
beautiful as a child of an immortal. And the 
great Brahmana, Sthulokesha, the chief of 
Munis, finding it a female child, 

10. Out of compassion, took it home and 
brought it up. The lovely child grew up 
tn the hermitage of the great Rishi. 

11. The great Rishi, the blessed Sthulo¬ 
kesha, performed for her in succession all the 
ceremonies with that of her birth, as ordained 
in the Sastras . 

12. As she surpassed all others in beauty, 
in goodness and in every pood quality, 
the great Rishi gave her the name of 
Pramadvara. 

13. Ruru saw her in the hermitage and 
the pious man fell in love with her. 

14. He made his father Pramati, the 
son of Brigu, acquainted with his love 
through his companions. Thereupon Pra¬ 
mati asked the illustrious Sthulokesha to 
give Pramadvara to his son. 

15. The Rishi betrothed Pramadvara to 
Ruru, fixing the day of marriage when 
the star Varga Daivata would be in ascen¬ 
dant. 

t 6. A few days before the date fixed for 
toe nuptials, while the lovely girl was playing 
with her companions, 

17. Her time having come and impelled 
by Fate, she trod upon a snake. She did not 
perceive it, as it lay coiled. 

18. The snake, to fulfil the will of Fate, 
stang the heedless girl with its venomous 
fangs. 


19. Stung by the snake, she suddenly 
fell senseless on the ground with her color 
faded and all her beauties gone, 

20. Her hair dishevelled, a spectacle of 
woe to her friends and companions. She, 
who was so handsome when alive, became 
in death what was too painful to look at. 

21. The slender-waisted girl, as she lay 
on the ground as one asleep, looked more 
beautiful than she was when alive. 

22. Her father and other ascetics, who 
were present, saw her lying motionless on 
the ground with the beauty of a lily. 

23. Then there came all the noted Brah- 
manas, filled with compassion. Swastyatreya, Mahajana, Kushika, Sankhyamekhala, 

24. Uddalaka, Katha, and the renowned 
Sweta, Bharadwaja, Kaunakutsya, Arshtisena, Goutama, 

25. Pramati and Pramati's son Ruru, 
and other inhabitants of the forest were 
filled with compassion and they all wept 
when they saw the n>aiden lying on the ground 
overcome by the poison of the snake. And 
Ruru, being exceedingly pained, left the 
scene. 

thus ends the eighth Section , Puulama, 
in the Adi Parva. 


Section 9

(PAULAMA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti replied 

1. While the noble Brahmanas were 
sitting round the dead body, Ruru, much 
aggrieved, retired into a deep forest and swept 

2. Overwhelmed with grief, he indulged 
in much piteous lamentations. Remembering 
his beloved Pramadvara, he thus lamented 
in grief, 

3. Alas ! The slender-bodied beauty 
who increases my grief, is now lying on the 
bare ground. What can be more painful 
than this to all her friends ! 

4. If ever have I bestowed charity, if 
ever have I observed penances, if ever have 
I showed respect to my superiors, let the 
merits of these acts restore to life my be¬ 
loved one. 

5. If ever have I controlled my passions 
from my birth, if ever have I stuck to my 
vows, let the beautiful Pramadvara rise from 
the ground." 

6. While he was thus lamenting in 
sorrow for the loss of his bride, a heaven's 
messenger came to him in the forest and 
addressed him thus; 

The Devaduta said 

7. O Ruru, the words that you arc titter¬ 
ing in grief can have no effect; for, O noble- 
vnindea (Rishi), one belonging to this world, 
whose days are run out, cannot come back 
to life again. 

8. This poor child of the Gandharva and 
the Apsara has her days run out; therefore, 
O child, do not give yourself up to grief. 

o. The great dieties, however, have pro¬ 
vided beforehand a means. If you comply 
with it, you may get back your Pramadvara. 

He said:— 

10. O messenger of heaven, (tell me) what 
means have been provided beforehand by 
the dieties. Tell me in full, so that I may 
comply with it. You should save me. 

The Devaduta said:— 

11. O Descendant of Brigu, give up 
half of your own life to your bride and, O 
Ruru, your Pramadvara will then rise from 
the ground. 

Earn said:— 

12. O best of heaven’s messengers, 
I give up half of my life to my bride. Let 
my beloved one rise in the dress and the 
form of love. 

Sauti said:— 

13. The king of the Gandharvas and the 
greatly qualified messenger of heaven, both 
went to the Diety Dharma and addressed 
him thus 

14- u O king Dharma, if it pleases you, 
let the beautiful bride of Ruru, Pramadvara, 
rise up endued with a moitey of Ruru’s 
life.” 

The Dharmaraja said:— 

15. “O messenger of heaven, if it be your 
with, let the bride of Ruru, Pramadvara, 
rise up endued with a moitey of Ruru’s 
life. 

Sauti said 

16. When Dharma thus spoke, the 
beautiful Pramadvara, the betrothed bride 
of Ruru, rose up as from a slumber. 

17. It was seen afterwards that the best¬ 
owal of a moitey of his own life to resusciate 
his bride by Ruru of long life, led to a 
curtailment of his own life. 

18. Thereupon their fathers gladly 
married them with due rites, and the couple 
passed their days devoted to each other. 


19. thus having obtained a wife, dHfi 
cult to be obtained, who was beautiful 
and bright as the filaments of the lotus, the 
Rishi of hard austerities (Ruru) made a vow 
to destroy the serpent race. 

20. Whenever he saw a snake, he was 
filled with great anger, and he always killed 
it with a weapon. 

21. One day, O Brahmana, Rufu entered 
into a very large forest. He saw an old 
Dunduva snake tying on the ground. 

22. Thereupon with the intention o 
killing it, Ruru raised his staff in anger,—a 
staff like the staff of Death. The Dunduva 
then said to the angry Brahmana, 

23. “ O Rishi, I have done you no harm 
Why should you kill me in anger ? ” 

thus ends the ninth Section , Paulama , 
in the Adi Parva, 


Section 10

(PAULAMA PARVA.) — Continued. 

Ruru said 

1. My wife, who was as dear to me as 
my life, was stung by a snake; on which f 
took, O snake, a fearful vow ; 

2. Namely that I would kill every snake 
that I might meet with. therefore I shall 
strike you and you shall be deprived of yo&r 
life. 

The Dunduva said:— 

3. O Brahmana, there are other snakes 
which bite man. The Dunduvas are only 
snakes in name. therefore, you should not 
kill the Dunduvas . 

4. Subject to the same calamity, but not 
sharing the same good fortune, being same 
in woe, but different in joy, you should not 
kill the Dunduvas , for you cannot judge 
between right and wrong. 

Sauti said:— 

5. Hearing those words of the snake, 
and seeing that the snake w'as realty of the 
Dunduva kind, and that it was terribly 
frightened, Ruru did not kill it. 

6. Then Ruru, the possessor of six 
attributes, cheering up the snake, said to 
it, “Who are you, tell me, O snake, that 
have been thus metamorphosed V 

The Dunduva said 

7. O Ruru, I was formerly a Rishi. 
named Shahasrapata. It is by the curse of a 
Brahmana that I have become a snake 



ADI PARVA. 


Rturu said 

8. O best of snakes, why were you cursed 
by an angry Brahmana ? And how long 
will your this body continue ? 

thus ends the tenth Section r Paulama, 
in tixe Adi Parva . 


Section 11 

(PAULAMA PARVA.)— Continued. 

The Dunduva said 

1. In time gone by, I had a friend, a 
Brahmana, by name Khagama. He was 
truthful, and possessed spiritual powers 
by penances. 

2. When he was engaged in Agnihotra, 
out of boyish frivolity, I made a snake of the 
blades of grass and tried to frighten him. 
He fainted away (when he saw this mock 
snake). 

3. Recovering his senses, that truthful 
and penance-performing Rishi exclaimed in 
anger, 

4. "As you made a powerless mock 
snake to frighten me, you will yourself turn 
into a venomless serpent by my curse.” 

5. O Rishi, l was well aware of the power 
of penances that he possessed. therefore, 
with an agitated heart, I addressed him 
thus, 

6. Bending low and joing both hands, 
"As I am your friend, I have done this 
only as a joke to make you laugh. 

7—8. You should, O Brahmana, pardon 
me and revoke your curse.” Seeing me 
very much distressed, the ascetic was moved ; 
and breathing hot and hard, he said, “What 
I have said must happen. 

9. O ascetic, listen to what I say ; and 
hearing it, O pious man, always lay it to 
your heart. 

10. When Ruru the holy, the son of 
Pramati will appear, you will be immediately 
relieved of the curse on seeing him.” 

11. You are the very Ruru, the son 
of Pramati. Now regaining my natural 
form, I shall speak something for your 
benefit. 

Sauti said 

12. That illustrious {man and the best 
of Brahmanas then left his snake-body and 
attained his own form and original bright¬ 
ness. 

13. He then r addresscd Ruru of imeom- 
parable power, saying, " O, best of beings, 
the highest morality is 4 Not to destroy 
Life
14. therefore, a Brahmana should never 
take the life of any creature. The injunc¬ 
tion of the Sroti is that a Brahmana snould 
always be mild. 

15. Learned in the Vedas and the Vedan - 
gas and an inspirer of confidence in all crea~ 
tures, kind to all, truthful, and forgiving; 

16. And a great retainer of the Vedas irr 
memory,—these are the natural duties of a 
Brahmana. The natural duties of Kashtrya 
are not those of yours. 

17. To be stem, to hold scepts, to rule 
the subjects, are the natural duties of the 
Kshalrya. Listen to me, O Ruru 

18. In days of yore, the snakes were 
destroyed in the sacrifice of Janamejaya, 
but the terrified snakes were saved by a 
Brahmana. 

19. It was by Astika reamed in the 
Vedas and the Vedangas and mighty in 
spiritual power.” 

• thus ends the eleventh Section , Paulama, 
in the Adi Parva . 


Section 12 

(PAULAMA PARVA.)— Continued, 

Ruru said 

1. O best of the twice-born, why did 
king Janamejaya become the destroyer of the 
snakes, and now did he destroy them ? 

2. Why were they saved by wise Astika, 
the best of Brahmanas ? I am desirous of 
hearing all this. 

Rishi said:— 

3. O Runs, you will hear the" important 
history of Astika from the Brahmanas. 
Saying this he disappeared. 

Sauti said:— 

4. Ruru rushed in search of the Rishi, but 
he did not find him in all the forest. Finding 
him not, he sat down on the ground, much 
fatigued 

5. He felt himself confounded and seem¬ 
ed to lose his senses. He repeatedly pon¬ 
dered over the Rishi’s words. 

6. Regaininghis senses, he came home and 
asked his father (to relate the history), and 
his father related to him the story. 

thus ends the twelfth chapter, Paulama 
in the_Adi Parva. 


Section 13 

(ASTIKA PARVA.) 

Saunaka said:— 

1. Why did that best of kings, 
king Janamejaya, resolve to destroy the 
snakes in a Snake-sacrifice?

2. O Soud, tell us in full the true story. 
Why did the best of the twice-born Astika, 
the foremost of ascetics, rescue the snakes 
from the blazing fire ?

3. Whose son was the monarch who 
performed the Snake-sacrifice ? Whose son 
was that best of the twice-born, (who saved 
the snakes) ? Tell us this. 

8outi said 

4. O best of speakers, the story of 
Astika is very long, I shall relate it in full. 
O Listen. 

Saunaka said 

5. I am desirous of hearing in detail 
the interesting history of Astika, the illustrious 
Brahmana. 

Sauti said:— 

6. The Brahmanas call this history, 
recited by Krishna Dwaipayana, a Purana. 
To the dwellers of Naimisnaranya, 

7. Was it formerly narrated by my learned
father Lomharshana, the disciple of Vyasa, 
as requested by the Brahmanas. 

8.  I was present at the time, O Saunaka. 
As you ask me, I shall recite it exactly as I 
heard it. 

9. (Listen) to this all sin-destroying 
history. Astika's father was as powerful as 
the Prajapati. 

10. He was a Brahmachari, always
engaged in austere penances, regular in meals, 
a great Rishi of controlled sexual desire. 
He was known by the name of Jaratkaru. 

11. He was the foremost of Yayavaras t 
a man of rigid vows, highly religious and 
endowed with great ascetic powers. Once at 
a time this great ascetic, 

12. Being Jaira Shnyati Griha (living 
in the place where night overtook him), 
roamed all over the world, bathed in many 
sacred waters and visited many holy shrines. 

13 He practised difficult austere penances; 
and feeding on air, remaining in fast, and 
renouncing sleep forever, he roamed (over 
the world.) 

T 4- Aj bright as a blaring fire, he roamed 
rib'vjL and thu roving about, he one dav 
his ancc.tor. 


15. Hanging their heads down in a great 
hole, their feet pointing upwards. On see 
ing them, Jaratkaru addressed his ances¬ 
tors thus, 

16.  Who are you thus hanging in the 
hole, your heads do w nw ar d, by a rope of the 
Birana fibre which has been eaten by the 
rats that live secretly near this hole 7 " 

The Ancestors said -

17. We are Rishis of austere penances, 
called Jayavara . We are sinking down into 
the earth for the want of an offspring. 

18. We have a son, named Jaratkaru. 
Unfortunate we arc, that wretch has adopt¬ 
ed asceticism. 

19. And therefore that fool does not think 
of marriage to raise up offspring. It is 
for this reason, namely the want of offspring, 
that we are thus suspended in the hole. 

20. Having means, we are like sinners 
who have no means. O excellent man, who 
are you that are sorrowing for us like a 
friend ?

21. O Brahmana, we wish to know who. 
you are that stand near us, and why, O 
excellent man, are you sorrowing for us 7 

Jaratkaru said 

22. You are my sires and grand-sires, 

I am that very Jaratkaru. Tell me what I 
shall do. 

The Ancestors said -

23. Try your best to do that by which 
you can raise up an offspring to extend our 
line. You will then do an act meritorious 
both for you and for us. 

24. O Son, not by the fruits of virtue, 
not by the hoarded-up ascetic penances, 
does one acquire such merit as is acquired 
by one who is a father. 

25. therefore, O son, set your mind 
upon marriage and offspring at our com¬ 
mand. It will do us the highest good. 

Jaratkaru said 

26. I shall not marry, nor shall I earn 
money for my own self. But I shall marry 
to do you good. 

27-28. If a bride can be had whose 
name will be the same as mine, whose 
friends will give her to me willingly and as 
a gift,—O fathers, under these conditions, if 
I get a girl, your command will be obeyed. 
J shall duly marry her according to the 
ordinances of the Sastras . 

29. But who will give his daughter to a 
poor man like me to be my wife 7 I shall, 
however, accept the girl who will be given to 
me as a gift. 

30. O Sires, I shall try to marry such a 
girl. Having said so, 1 shall not act other¬ 
wise. 

31. O fathers, I shall beget offspring on 
her for your release, so that you may attain 
to the heaven, called Saswata , and rejoice 
there at will. 

thus ends the thirteenth Section , Astika, 
in the Adi Parva, 


Section 14 

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. The Brahmana of hard austerities 
(Jaratkaru) roamed over the world for a 
wife, but wife he did not get. 

2. One day he went into the forest, and 
remembering the words of his ancestors, he 
thrice begged for a bride in a faint voice. 

3. Thereupon, Vasuki appeared and 
offered his sister for the Rishi’s acceptance. 
But the Rishi hesitated to accept her, think¬ 
ing her to be not of the same name with 
himself. 

4. The high-souled Jaratkaru thought 
within himself, “I will take none for my 
wife who does not bear my name." 

5. Then Jaratkaru, the great ascetic of 
rigid austerities, said, “ O snake, tell me 
truly what is the name of your sister?’' 

Vasuki said 

6. O Jaratkaru, my sister’s name is also 
Jaratkaru. Given as a gift by me, accept 
this girl of slender waist for your wife. O 
best of the twice born, I had kept her in 
reserve for you. therefore, take ner. 

7. Saying this he offered his beautiful 
sister to Jaratkaru, who then married her 
according to the ordained rites. 

thus ends the fourteenth Section , Astika , 
in Ike Adi Parva . 


Section 15 

(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. Q Foremost of Brahma-knowing 
men, the mother of the snakes, in the days 
of yore, cursed the Naga race, saying, 
4t He whose charioteer is wind (Agni) wul 
consume you at Janamejaya’s sacrifice.” 

2. To neutralise the effect of that curse, 
the best of snakes (Vasuki) married his 
sister to the high-soulcd Rishi of rigid 
vow. 

3. Accepting her according to he 
ordained rites, he begot on her a high- 
souled son, called Astika, 

4. Who was a great ascetic, who was 
vastly learned in the Vedas and the Vedan- 
gas, who removed the fears of his perents, 
and who saw everything with an equal eye. 

5. Then after a long time, a tiescendant 
of the Pandavas, celebrated a great sacri¬ 
fice, known as the Snake-sacrihce. 

6. When the sacrifice for the destruction 
of the snakes had begun, the great ascetic 
Astika rescued the Nagas, 

7. H is brothers, his maternal uncles, 
and other snakes. He also delivered his 
fathers by begetting a child. 

8. O Brahmana, he freed himself from 
their debts by rigid austerities, by various 
vows and the study of the Vedas. He 
propitiated the celestials by sacrifices in 
which various presents were made. 

9. He pleased the Rishis by his Brahma- 
charya and his ancestors by begetting 
offspring. thus discharging the heavy debt 
that he owed to his anscestors, 

10. Jaratkaru, of great austerity, attain¬ 
ed heaven with his forefathers. Begcttitng 
the son, Astika, and acquiring great religious 
merit, the best of the Munis, 

11. The greatly noble Jaratkaru, after a 
long course of years, went to heaven. This is 
the story of Astika. I have briefly narrated 
it (to you). Now, tell me, O best of the 
Brigu race, what else I shall narrate. 

thus ends the fifteenth chapter, Astika, in 
the Adi Parva . 


Section 16

(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued, 

Sauti said 

1. O Sauti, once more relate to us I 
detail the history of the learned and virtuous 
Astika. Great is our curiosity to hoar it. 

2. O gentle one, you speak very sweetly
with proper accent and emphasis. We are 
very much pleased with your speech. You 
speak like your (late) father. 

3. Your father was always ready to 
please us. Tell us, therefore, the story that 
your father had related. 

Sauti said:— 

4. O long-lived ones, I shall narrate the 
story of Astika as I heard it from my father, 

5. O Brahmana, in the golden age» 
Prajapati had two fair daughters. O sinless 
one, the two sisters were endued with great 
beauty, 

6. They were named Kadru and Vinata, 
and they were the wives of Kashyapa. Their 
husband, who was like Prajapati, having 
been pleased with him, gave each a boon. 

7. Kashyapa derived much happiness 
from his wives. Hearing that their husband 
Kashyapa was willing to bestow on them 
boons, 

8. The most beautiful damsels felt a 
transport of joy. Kadru wished to have one 
thousand snakes as her sons, all of equal 
splendour. 

9. Vinata asked for two sons, equal to 
all the sons of Kadru in strength, energy, 
size and prowess. 

10. On Kadru did her husband bestow 
the boon of )he multitude of sons ; and to 
Vinata he said, ” Be it so.” 

11. Vinata, having got the boon, was 
much pleased, and having obtained two 
greatly powerful sons, he regarded her 
boon granted. 

12. Kadru also obtained one thousand 
sons, all of equal splendour. “ Bear the 
embryos carefully.” So saying the great 
ascetic Kashyapa went into the forest, lea¬ 
ving his two wives much gratified with his 
boons. 

Sauti said-

13. O best of Brahmanas, after a long 
time Kadru gave birth to one thousand eggs 
and Vinata two eggs. 

14. Their maid-servants kept them se¬ 
parately in warm vessels, and thus five hun¬ 
dred years passed away. 

15. After five hundred years, the sons 
of Kadru came out of the eggs, but Vinata’s 
eggs did not produce anything. 

16. Thereupon the ascetic lady Vinata, 
feeling shame broke ppen one of the eggs, 
and saw her offspring, 

17. As an embryo with the upper part 
developed, but the lower part undeveloped. 
Thereupon the child grew angry and cursed 
its mother, saying, 

18. " O mother, as you have prematurely 
broken this egg, and did not allow my body 
to be fully developed, being jealous (of 
Kadru), you will have to serve as the slave 
(of that very Kadru). 

19—20. O mother, if you wait with pa¬ 
tience five thousand years and do not des¬ 
troy the other egg, the illustrious chOd 
within it wiQ deliver you from your slavery. 

21 O mother, If you are desirous of 
having your son strong, take tender care 
of the egg for five thousand years. 

22—23. thus cursing his mother Vinata; 
the child rose to the sky. O Brahmana, 
A run a (this child) became the charioteer of 
the Sun, and he is to be seen in the hour 
of the rooming. At the stipulated time 
was also born the snake-eater Garuda. 

24. As soon as he was bora, he left 
his mother, and the king of the birds, being 
hungry, mounted on his wings to seek for 
the food assigned to him by the great 
Ordainer. 

thus ends ike sixteenth chapter, Astika, 
in the Adi Parva • 


Section 17

(ASTIKA PARVA.)

Sauti said:— 

1. O ascetic Rishi, about this time the 
two sisters one day saw Uchaisrava 
approaching towards them. 

2. (It was horse) who was worshipped by 
the celestials, who was the gem among ail 
horses, who rose at the churning of the 
ocean for the Ambrosia, 

3. Who was divine, graceful, ever-young r 
irresistablc, vigorous, who was cr eato r’s 
masterpeice, and who was blessed with all 
the auspicious marks. 

4. Why and where did the celestials 
chum the ocean for the Ambrosia, in which 
did rise, as you say, this best of steeds, so 
powerful and resplendent T Tell me this. 

Sauti said:— 

5. There is a very great mountain, called 
Meru of blazing and effulgent appearance. 
The rays of the sun are scattered away 
when they fall on its golden summit. 

6. Decked with gold, and exceedingly 
beautiful, this mountain is frequented oy 
the Devas aud Gandharvas ; it is immea¬ 
surable and unapproachable by men of 
many sins. 

7. It is ilium mated with many medicinal 
plants ; and fearful beasts of prey roam 
on its heights. 

8 . It is unapproachable even by mind ; 
it is graced with many tr e es and streamlets, 
and resounds with the sweet melody of 
innumerable birds. 

9. It stands high for infinite ages. Once 
did the celestials sit on its golden summit 
and held a conclave. 

10. They, who had practised penances 
and observed vows, tame in quest of the 
Ambrosia. They consulted together about 
the possession of the Ambrosia and seeing 
them in this mood Narayana addressed 
Brahma saying ; 

12—13. " Churn the ocean with both 
the Devas and the Asuras. By doing so, 
the Ambrosia and all durgs and gems will 
be obtained. O celestials, churn the ocean 
you will then get the Ambrosia. 

thus ends the seventeenth Section , 
Amritdmanthana , in the Adi Parva, 


Section 18

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. There is a mountain called Mandara 
with peaks like the clouds. It is the best of 
mountains and adorned with innumerable 
creepers. 

2. On it do many birds pour forth their 
melody and may beasts of prey roam about; 
it is frequented by the Kinnaras, Apsaras 
and celestials. 

3. It rises eleven thousand Yojanas 
upwards and descends eleven thousand 
Yojanas downwards. 

4. The celestials, having failed to uproot 
it, came to Vishnu and Brahma who were 
sitting together, and said to them. 

5. “ Devise some means you yourselves. 
Do tiy to uproot Mandara for our good." 

6. O son of Brigu, “ Let it be so" said 
both Narayana and Brahma. The lotus- 
eyed (Vishnu) laid the hard task on the king 
•ci the snakes, (Ananta.) 

7—8. Being directed by both Brahma 
and Narayana to do it, the mighty 
Ananta uprooted the mountain with all the 
woods and the denizens of woods that were 
on It. 

9. Then came all the celestials with 
Ananta to the shores of the ocean. Address¬ 
ing it they said,—“ O Ocean, we have come 
to chum you for the Ambrosia. 

10. The ocean replied, “ Be it so, as I 
shall get a share of it. I am quite able to 
bear the great agitation arising out of the 
churning of my water by Mandara . 

11. The Devas and the Danavas then 
went to the Tortoise king and said, “You 
will have to hold the mountain on your 
bade." 

12. The Tortoise king having agreed, 
Indra placed that mountain on its back by 
meai\yf instRuruents. 

4. The Devas and the Danavas 
Haring made Mandara the churning staff
and Vasuki the rope, O Brahmana, in days 
of yore, began to chum the ocean for the 
Ambrosia. The Asuras held him by the 
head and the Devas by the tail. 

15. And Ananta, who was a manifested 
form of Narayana, again and again raised 
and lowered the hood of the Naga. 

16. On account of the great agitation’ 
received at the hands of the celestials, black 
vapours with flames issued from the mouth 
of the Naga Vasuki. 

17. From these vapours were created 
clouds with lightning; and they poured 
showers on the tired celestials who were 
thus refreshed. 

18. The flowers that fell from the trees 
on the mountain-sides on the Devas and the 
Danavas also refreshed them. 

19. There rose from Mandara , dragged 
by the Devas and the Danavas, a terrible 
roar like the roar of the clouds (at the 
Universal dissolution.) 

20. Various acquatic animals were 
crushed by the great mountain and gave 
up their lives in the salt sea. 

21. Many denizens of the lower region 
and those of the land of Varuna were killed 
by the mountain. 

22. From the whirling Mandara large 
trees, being struck at one another, were 
torn from their roots and fell into the ocean 
with all the birds (that roosted on their 
branches.) 

23. And great fires were produced from 
the mutual friction of the trees that fre 
quentlv blazed up, and the Mandara 
mountain looked like black clouds charged 
with lightning. 

24. It burnt the lions, elephants, and 
other various creatures that were on the 
mountain and killed them (on the spot.) 

25. Then the best of the celestials, Indra 
began to extinguish the blazing fire by 
pouring heavy showers. 

26. Then the gums of various great tree 
and herbs mingled with the waters of the 
ocean. 

27. The celestials' became immortal by 
drinking the water mixed with the liquid 
extract of gold and those gums which had 
the quality of the Ambrosia. 

28. The milky water of the churned 
ocean by degrees produced clarified butter 
by virtue of those gums and juices. 

29. Thereupon the Devas came to the 
boon-granting God who was comfortably 
seated on his seat and said, “ O Brahman, 
we are spent out but the Ambrosia has 
not yet arisen." 

30. Except Narayana, both the Devas 
and the Danavas have no strength to churn 
the ocean (any longer). 

3. Then did Brahma say to Naravana, 
“ Kindly give the celestials strength to churn
the Ocean again with Mandara mountain. 

Narayana said:— 

32. I grant you all necessary strength. 
•Go insert the mountain and churn the 
Ocean. 

33. thus hearing the words of Narayana, 
and being re-equipped with fresh strength 
rhe celestials recommenced churning. 

34. Then from the ocean rose the mild 
and brilliant Moon of thousand rays. 

33. Then rose from Ghee , the lotus- 
seated Lakshmi ; then Sura Devi (Wine) 
-then the great Steed. 

36. Then from the Ghee rose the celes¬ 
tial gem Kaustaua which adorns the breast 
of Narayana. 

37. Then rose, O Brahmana, Parijat 
tree and Suravi, all giver of every thing. 

38. Lakshmi, Wine, Moon, Horse 
(Uchaisrava), fleet as the mind, all directed 

‘bv Adrtya went to the place where the celes¬ 
tials were. 

39. Then rose the divine Dhanyantari 
with a white vessel in his hand, and (there 
in , that vessel) was the Ambrosia. 

40. Seeing this wonderful phenamenon, 
the Danavas raised a great uproar for the 
Ambrosia, saying 14 It is ours.” 

41. Then rose the great elephant Aira- 
vata, with two white tusks and a huge body, 
artd he was seized by the weilder of thunder 
(Indra). 

42. The churning was still continued ; 
and then appeared deadly poison, which 
soon covered the whole earth and blazed up 
like a fire with fumes. 

43. The three worlds \cre stupified by 
its terrible smell; and then Shiva, asked by 
Brahma, swallowed it to save the creation. 

44. The great Deity Mahcshwara of 
Mantra-form held it in his throat, and it is 
said that from the very day he was called 
Nilkantha (blue-throat.) 

45. Seeing all those wonderful pheno¬ 
mena; the Danavas were filled with 
despair. They raised up great hostilities 
with the celestials for the possession of 
Lakshmi and Ambrosia. 

46. Thereupon Narayana assumed a 
form of a ravishing beauty by the aid of 
Maya, and he began a flirtation with the 
Danavas in the form of a female. 

47. The foolish Danavas and Dakya 
becoming fully enamoured of her, placed 
the Ambrosia in her hands. 

thus ends the eighteenth chapter, Arnrita 
Mantana, in the Adi Parva 


Section 19

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said. 

1. Then the Daityas and Danavas, in 
best armours and with various weapons, 
pursued the celestials. 

2. In the meantime the greatly power¬ 
ful Lord Vishnu, accompanied with 
Narayana, took away the Ambrosia from the 
mighty Danavas. 

3. Thereupon all the celestials, in that 
great struggle, drank the Ambrosia receiv¬ 
ing it from Vishnu. 

4. When the celestials were drinking the 
much longed-for Ambrosia, a Danava, 
named Rahu, drank it in the guise of a 
celestial. 

5. When the Ambrosia has only reached 
his throat, Chandra and Surya (recognised 
him and) informed the celestials of what 
had happened. 

6. Narayana immediately with his 
discus cut off the well-adorned head of the 
Danava who was drinking the Ambrosia. 

7. The huge head of the Danava, cut 
off by the discus, rose up to the sky like a 
mountain peak, and it uttered terrible 
cries. 

8. The headless body of the Danava 
fell on the earth, shaking it with all bet 
mountains, forests, and islands. 

9. From that day a great enmity was 
created between the head of Rahii and 
Chandra and Surja. To this day it swal¬ 
lows Chandra and Surya (causing ecclipses.) 

10. Then Hari, quitting his matchless 
female form, ,made the Danavas tremble by 
hurling at them various weapons. 

11. thus began the terrible battle be¬ 
tween the Devas and Danavas on the shores 
of the salt sea. 

t 2. thousands of sharp javilins and 
lances and various other weapons were 
hurled on all sides. 

13. Cut by the discus and wounded by 
swords, darts and maces the As urns vomi¬ 
ted blood and lay prostrate on earth. 

14. The heads, adorned with bright 
gold, cut off by the discus, fell continually in 
the fearful battle. 

15. Thfc great Asuras, covered with 
blood, lay dead everywhere, and they looked 
like red dyed mountain peaks. 

16(k When the sun grew red, the piteous 
tires of distress issued from everywhere and 
from die dying A suras. 

17. The roars, of the warriors that cut 
one another down by misseJes when at a 
distance, and by biows of their fisis when at 
close qtialters, rose to the sky. 

18. “Cut down,” “pierce them”, “pur¬ 
sue”, "advance” these fearful war-cries were 
beard everywhere. 

19. When this tearful battle was raging, 
Mara and Nary an a entered the Aeid- 

120. Seeing the celestial bow in the hand 
of Nara, Narayana thought of his Danava- 
destroying discus. 

21. As soon as it was thought of the discus 
Sudasshana, the destroyer of enemies, efful¬ 
gent as Agna, and dreadful in battle, came 
down from the sky. 

$2. When It came, Achyuta, of feaflrltri 
energy (Narayana as blight as the bla¬ 
zing hre, with arms like the trunk of an ele¬ 
phant, hurled with great force that weapon, 
as bright as the blazing fere, dreadful, of 
extraordinary lusturc, capable of destroy¬ 
ing hostile towns. 

23. That discus, blazing like the fire at 
the great dissolution of the universe, being 
hurled by the hand of Narayana, continu¬ 
ally falling everywhere, destroyed the Daityas
and the Danavas by thousands. 

24. Sometimes it blazed like fire and 
Consumed them all; sometimes it struck them 
down like a goblin ; sometimes it drank the 
blood of the slain Danavas as it travelled 
through earth and sky. 

25. The greatly powerful and bold Danavas, 
looking like tlie rainless clouds, rose to 
the sky and continually hurled down thou¬ 
sands of mountains, on the celestials, thus 
harassing them (with terrible vengeance). 

26. And those Fearful mountains, with 
their forests and flat tops, like masses of 
clouds, fell from the sky, collided with owe- 
anothet and produced a tremendous roar. 

27. And when thousands of warriors con¬ 
tinually shouted on the field of battle, and 
mountains, with forests thereon, fell all 
around, the earth with her forest began to 
tremble. 

28. Then the divine Nara, appearing 
in the fearful battle of the Asuras
and reducing to dust those mountains by 
means of his arrows, covered 
the heavens. 

29. Then the mightly Danava, having 
been overpowered by the celestials ana 
having seen the fearful discus roving 
over the fields of heaven, 
entered into the bowels of the earth, and 
some of them plunged into the sea. 

30. The celestials, having gained die victory,
placed with due respect Mandara on 
its own base; and the clouds, making the 
heaven resound with their shouts, went to 
their own abodes. 

31. The celestials returning to heaven, 
rejoiced and and kept the Ambrosia 
in great care. 

32. Indra and other celestials offered 
the vessel contaming Ambrosia to Nara to 
keep it. 

Section 20

(ASTIKA PARVA) 
Sauti said:— 

1. thus have I narrated to you how the 
Ambrosia was churned out of the Ocean
in which the beautiful and powerful horse 
(Uchaisrava) was produced. 

2. Respecting this horse Kadru Asked 
Vinata, saying, "Tell me, sister, without 
delay, what is the color of Uchaisrava?” 

Vinata said:— 

3. This king of the horses is of white 
colour. What color do you think, sister ? 
Say what Is its color ; let us lay a wager on 
it- 

Kadru said:

4. O sweet lady of smiles, I think the 
horse is black in its tail. Let us lay this wager 
that she, whose words will be untrue will 
become the slave are of the other. 

Sauti said:

5. Let the one who loses be the 
slave of the other, they went home, saying 
We shall see the 

6. Wishing to play a deception. 
Kadru ordered her thousand sons to be 
black; 

7. And speedily cover the horse’s tail  
to that she might not become a slave. But 
on their refusal to do her bidding, sha 
cursed the snakes, saying, 

8. In the Snake-Sacrifice, wise Janamejaya of the Pandava race, 
Agni will consume you all.” 


9. The Grandsire (Brahma) himself heard 
this exceedingly cruel curse, denounced by 
Kadru, impelled by Fate. 

10. And he (Brahma), out of kindness 
for creatures, and seeing that the snakes had 
enormously multiplied, approved of this 
curse with all the aietics. 

11—12. 14 Considering their virulent prison,
excessive strength, great prowess, biting 
propensity, their mother's curse had been 
very proper for the good of all creatures." 

13.Fate always inflicts death on those 
who seek the death of others." Talking 
thus, the celestials much praised Kadru. 

14—15. Then calling Kashyapa, the 
Diety said O sinless one, O powerful one, 
the snakes of virulent poison, of huge 
bodies, and of biting propensity whom you , 
have begotten have been cursed by their 
mother. O child, you should not . be 
least sorry for it. 

16. The destruction of the snakes in the 
sacrifice (of Janamejaya) has been told in 
the Purana." Saying tnis, the Divine creator 
of the Universe propitiated Kashyapa and 
bestowed on that great man the knowledge 
of neutralising poison. 

thus ends the twentieth Section San - 
parna, in the Adi Parva. 


Section 21

(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti said 

t. O Rishi, when the night was gone 
and the sun rose in the morning, the sisters, 
Kadru, and Vinata, 

2. Having laid an wager of slavery, 
and burning in jealously, started to see the 
horse Uchaisrava. 

3. On their way they saw the great 
ocean, vast and deep, agitated by wind, 
making a tremendous roar. 

4. It was fuH of whales, fishes large 
-enough to swallow whales, Makaras, tortoises, 
and creatures of various forms by thousands. 

5. It was inaccessible by any creatures on 
account of the presence of terrible, monster¬ 
shaped, dark and fierce acquatic animals. 
It was full of crocodiles and tortoises. 

6. It abounded with all kinds of gems ; 
it was the home of Varuna, the beautiful and 
excellent abode of the Nagas ; it was the lord 
of all rivers. 

7. It was the abode of subterranean fire, 
the friend of the Asuras, the terror of all creatures, 
the great reservoir of waters, haring no 
deterioration. 


8. It was holy, it was beneficial to the 
celestials, it was the great mine of Ambrosia, 
it was infinite, mconcievable, sacred ami 
highly wonderful, 

9. It was fearful with the terrible roars of 
acquatic creatures, tremendously roaring, and 
full of deep whirlpools. It was an object of 
terror to all creatures. 

10. Moved by winds, heaving high with 
agitation and disturbance, it seemed to dance 
everywhere with uplifted hands represented 
by its waves. 

11. It was full of heaving billows, caused 
by the changes of the moon, it was the 
parent of (the great conch of Krishna) 
Panchajanya, it was the great mine of gems. 

12. It was in days of yore disturbed by 
the greatly powerful Lord Govinda (Vishnu) 
when he assumed the form, of a boar for 
raising the earth. 

13. The Rishi Atri of great austerity 
could not fathom its bottom, lower than the 
nether regions, though he tried to do it for 
one thousand years. 

14. It became the bed oflotus-navelled 
Vishnu when at the end of every Yura the 
immeasurably powerful Deity fell asleep in 
spiritual meditation. 

15. It was the asylum which (the hill) 
Mainaka took under the fear of the falling 
thunder. It was the retreat of the Asuras, 
overcome (by the celestials) in the fearful 
battle. 

16. It was the ghee, in the shape of its 
waters, in the (sacrificial) fire that issued 
forth from the mouth of Varava. It was 
without limits, fathomless, vast, immeasur¬ 
able and the lord of rivers. 

17. They saw that thousands of great 
rivers were rushing into it in great pride 
like rivals of its love. They [saw that it 
was full, always dancing in its waves. 

18. They saw that it was deep and re¬ 
sounded with the terrible uproar of Makaras 
Timees, and other acquatic creatures ; they 
saw it was vast, unlimited as space, un¬ 
fathomable, infinite and the great reservoir 
of waters. 

thus ends the twenty-first chapter, 
Sauparna , in the Adi Parva . 


Section 22

(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti said 

The Nagas, after a consultation, came 
to the conclusion that they should obey their 
mother s command, for if her wish was not 

gratified, she, abandoning her love towards 
them, would burn them all. 

If she was gratified, she might free 
them from curse. They said :— 44 We shall 
undoubtedly make the horse’s hair black.” 

 It is said that they then went and 
became hairs on the tail of the horse 
(Uchaisrava). In the mean time the two 
co-wives laid the wager. 

 And having laid the wAger, O best 
of Brahmanas, the two sisters proceeded in 
great delight to the other side of the great 
ocean. 

Kadru and Virrata, the daughters of 
Ddcsha, saw on their way the ocean, incap¬ 
able of being easily disturbed, 

(But) greatly agitated all on a sudden 
by the wind. (It was) terribly roaring, fuH 
of Timingils and Makaras, 

And thousand other creatures of 
various forms ; it was frightful for the pre¬ 
sence of horrible monsters, ; it was inacces¬ 
sible, fearful and terrible, 

The mine of all gems, the home of 
Varuna, the beautiful habitation of the 
Nagas, the Lord of rivers, 

The abode of subterranean fire, the 
home of the A suras and many fearful crea¬ 
tures, the reservoir of waters. 

It was h.ily, the great receptacle of 
the Ambrosia of the celestials, immeasurable 
and inconceivable, full of holy waters. 

Filled with many thousands of rivers, 
and thus disturbed, dacing in its waves. 

Such was the ocean full of liquid 
waves, (it was) vast as the sky, deep, lighted 
with the flames of subterranean fire, roar¬ 
ing ;—they (the sisters) passed quickly 
over it. 

thus ends the twenty second Section , 
Sauparna in the Adi Parva . 


Section 23

(ASTIKA PARVA.)-- Continued. 

Sauti said:— 

1. Kadru, of swift speed, accompanied by 
Vinata, having crossed the ocean, very soon 
came to the horse. 

2. They then saw that swift and the best 
of horses, as white as the -rays of the moon 
but with black hairs (in the tail.) 

3. Seeing many black hairs in the tail, 
Kadru put much dejected Vinata into 
slavery. 

4. thus having lost wager, Vinata be¬ 
came a slave exceedingly sorry. 


5. Meanwhile, when the time came, 
Garuda of great splendour came out burst¬ 
ing the egg without the help of his mother. 

6v He enkindled all the points of tlier 
universe, he was the bird endowed with 
strength, capable of assuming, any form at 
will, of going every where at will, and calling 
any amount of energy to action at will. 

7. He looked terrible like a heap of 
blazing fire,—of lustre equal to that of the 
fire at the erref of Yoga. Bi» eyes were 
bright like the flush of lightning. 

8. As soon as born, the huge bird, in¬ 
creasing his body, rose to the sky, fearfully 
roaring like a second ocean-fire. 

9. All the celestials seeing him, sought 
the protection of Vibftavecsn ( Agni). They 
bowed down to that Deity of Universal form 
who was seated on his seat and addressed 
him thus :—• 

10. " O Arm, do not extend your body. 
Have you resolved to consume us all, the 
huge heap of your flames is spreading 
wide!” 

Agni said:— 

11. O persecutors of the Asuras, it is not 
as you think. It is mighty Garuda, equal 
to me in splendour. 

12. He is born endued with great energy 
to promote the joy of Vinata. Seeing this 
heap of effulgence, your this delusion has 
come (in you.) 

13. He is the mighty son of Kashyapa, he 
is the destroyer of the Nagas, the enemy of 
the Daityas and Rakshashas, he is ever 
en £ a ged to do good to the celestials. 

14. Do not be afraid in the least. Come 
with me and see him. 

Sauti said 

15. thus asked, the celestials went with 
the Rishis towards Garuda and from a dis¬ 
tance addressed him thus. 

The Celestials said 

x6. O Lord of birds, you are a Rishi, 
you are the partaker of the largest portion 
of the sacrifice, you are Deity. You are 
Lord, you are the sun of hot rays, you are 
Parameshti, you are Prajapati, 

17. You are Indra, you are steed-necked 
Vishnu, you are the Cord of the universe, 
you are the principal, you are Brahma and 
Brahmanas, you are Agni, you are wind, 

18. You are Dhata , and Bidhata you are 
Vishnu the best of celestials, you are the 
great Truth, you are fearless, you are ever 
unchanged, you are great glory. 

Section 25
***

Section 26
***

Section 27
***

Section 28
***

Section 29


Kashyapa paid 

8. My son, are you doing well? Do you 
get sufficient food every day. Is there 
plenty of food for you Ih the World of men ? 

Garnda said 

9. My mother is well; And so is my 
brother and so am I. But, father, I do not 
get sufficient food, and therefore my happi¬ 
ness is not complete. 

10. I have been sent by the snakes to 
fetch the Ambrosia, which is not easy to get. 
However) I shall bring it to-day in order to 
emancipate my mother from her slavery. 

11. My mother commanded me to eat 
the Nishadas. I have eaten them by 
thousands, but my hunger is not appeased. 

12. O great one, point out to me some 
other food, by eating which, O Lord, I can 
bring the Ambrosia by force. You should 
point out some food which can appease 
my hunger and thirst, 

Kashyapa said 

13. This lake you see before you,, is very 
sacred. It is even known in the celestial 
regions. There is an elephant with its 
face downwards continually dragging a 
tortoise which is his elder brother. 

14. I shall speak to you in detail their 
hostility in the former life. Hear from me 
the true story, the proof of which b their 
presence here. 

15. There was in the olden time a great 
Rishi, named Vivavasu, who was of 
exceedingly angry disposition. He had a 
younger brother, named Supratika, a great 
ascetic. 

16. That great Risht was not willing to 
keep his wealth joint with his brother. 
Supratika always spoke of a partition. 

17. Some time after Vivavasu tcrid his 
brother Supratika, " It is from foolishness, 
blinded by wealth, that many wish to divide 
(paternal) wealth. 

18—19. But as soon as it is partitioned, 
they begin to quarrel from the blindness 
arising from wealth. And enemies in tho 
guise of friends, cause estrangement between 
ignorant and selfish brothers. They confirm 
their  ouarrels by pointing out faults, and 
thus they fall one by one. 

20. Absolute ruin very soon overtake  
those (brothers) that are separated. Therefore 
good men never approve of the partition 
amongst brothers, 

21. Who, when divided, do not have any 
regard for Sastras or Gurus . As you, with¬ 
out regarding my advice, impelled by the 
desire of aparijata, wish to partition 
wealth, 

22. For this, O Supratika, you will be 
come an elephant,  thus being curbed 
Supratika told Vishwavasu.

23. " You will become art aquatic tortoise
thus being cursed by each other Supratika 
and Vivavasu, 

24. Both fools now live as a tortoise and 
an elephant. Owing to their wrathful nature 
they have both become inferior animals. 

25. They are both engaged in hostilities 
with each other. Proud of their great 
strength and the weight of their body, in this 
lake, these two huge creatures are now 
en gaged m their old hostilities. 

26—27 Look, the handsome elephant is 
coming to the lake. Hearing his roar the 
huge tortoise rises up, violently agitating the 
water of the lake ; and seeing him the 
elephant, coiling his trank, rushes into the 
water. 

28. The greatly powerful elephant, with 
the motion of his tusks and forepart of his 
trunk and w ith tail and feet, violently agitates 
the water of the lakes full of fishes. 

29. The greatly powerful tortoise also, 
with its head up, comes to the fight. The 
elephant is six Yoyonas in height and twice 
that measure in circumference. 

30. The tortoise is also three Yoyonas in 
height and his circumference is ten yoyonas , 
Eat up both of these animals, madly en¬ 
gaged in battle and bent upon killing each 
other. 

31. (After eating them), accomplish the 
task you desire to perform, fiating. ;th 
fearful elephant which looks like a huge 
mountain and a huge msss of clouds, go 
and bring the Ambrosia. 

Sauti said:— 

32. Having said this to Garuda, he blessed 
him, saying, 

33 — 34 O oviparous one, let good come 
to you when you engage in battle with the 
celestials. Let water-pots filled to the brim, 
let Brahmanas, kine and other auspicious 
objects bless you. In the battle with the 
powerful celestials, 

35. Let Riks, Shaman, the sacred
sacrificial ghee, all the mysteries, and all 
the Vedas beceme your strength.

36. Having been thus addressed by his 
fatoer, Garuda went to the side of the lake. 
He saw it full of clear water and full of 
birds of various kinds flying all around.

37. Remembering his father’s words, the 
swift-flying great bird seized the elephant 
and the tortoise, one in each claw.


38. The great bird then soared high into 
the sky. Coming to a holy shrine, called 
Alamva , he saw many celestial trees. 

39. Struck by the wind raised by his 
wings, the trees began to tremble in fear. 
Those trees, with golden boughs, feared that 
they would be broken down. 

40. Thereupon the bird, seeing the trees 
that are capable of giving every thing, were 
trembling in fear, went to other trees of 
matchless appearance. 

41. And those big trees were adorned 
with fruits of gold and silver, and with 
branches of precious gems; and they were 
washed by the waters of the sea. There was 
a big banian amongst them. 

42. The great tree spoke to the best of 
the birds, who was flying away with the 
speed of the mind, saying, 

43. “ Sit down on this big branch of 
mine which extends a hundred yoyanas ; and 
eat the elephant and the tortoise.” 

44. When the best of birds, huge as a 
huge mountain and of great swiftness, 
alighted on the tree, the abode of thousands 
Of birds, it trembled; and the bough, full 
of leaves, was broken. 

thus ends the twenty ninth Section , 
Sauparna, in the Adi Parva. 


Section 30

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. The moment the branch of the tree 
was touched by the greatly powerful Garuda 
with his feet, it broke down. As it was 
about to fall, it was caught by him. 

2. As he cast his eyes in wonder on the 
broken branch of the tree, he saw that the 
Valikhilya Rishis were hanging form it, 
with their heads downwards. 

3. Having seen the holy Rishis thus 
suspended, he said to himself, ” These 
Rishis of great penances must not be 
killed. 

4. If the bough fell down, the Rishis will 
be killed.” Reflecting thus, the mighty 
bird held more firmly the elephant ana the 
tortoise. 

5. The king of birds, from the fear of 
killing the Risnis, and from the desire of 
saving theni, held the bough in his beaks 
and rose on his wings. 

6. The great Rishis, seeing this act 
which was beyond the powers o? the celes- 
t:aL, was filled with winder, and they gave 
the great biid a name, 


7. They said,—“ As this great bird 
rises on its wings with a heavy burden, let 
the best of the birds, the eater of snakes, 
be called Garuda." 

8. Then shaking the mountains, the bird 
slowly moved onward in the sky, and when 
he was thus going he saw many countries 
underneath. 

9. Wishing to save the Valikhilyas he 
could not find a (proper) place to sit on. At 
last he found the best of mountains.

10. . There did he saw his father, Kashyapa, engaged in ascetic devotions. His 
father also saw that great bird of divine 
form, 

11. And of great splendour, strength and 
energy, as swift as the wind or the mind, 
huge as a mountain peak, a ready smiter 
as a curse of a Brahmana, 

12. Inconceivable, indescribable, fearful 
to all creatures, possessed of great powers, 
terrible, as full of splendour as Agni him¬ 
self, 

13. Incapable of being overcome by the 
Devas and Danavas, capable of splitting 
mountains, and of sucking the ocean, 

14. Capable of destroying the three 
worlds, and as fierce-looking as Yama him¬ 
self. The greatly illustrious Kashyapa, seeing 
him approach, and knowing his intention, 
thus addressed him, 

Kashyapa said 

15. My son, do not commit a rash act, 
for you will then have to suffer pain. The 
Valikhilyas, that support on the rays of the 
sun, if angry, can blast you. 

Sauti said 

16. therefore, Kashyapa for the sake of 
his son, propitiated the greatly fortunate, ex¬ 
ceedingly ascetic and sinless Valikhilyas. 

Kashyapa said 

17. O great Rishis, the rise of Garuda 
is for the good of all creatures. He is trying 
to accomplish a great act, and therefore, you 
should give him permission. 

Sauti said 

18. The great ascetics, having been thus 
addressed by the illustrious Kashyapa, 
quitting the bough, went to the sacred 
Himalayas to observe ascetic penances. 

19. When the Rishis went away, the son 
of Vinata, his voice choked by the bough 
in his beaks asked fcis father Kashyapa, 

20. “ G illustrious one, where, sfca.ll I 
throw this great bough of the tree" 
illustrious one, point me out a place where 
there is no man.” 

21. Kashyapa told him of a mountain 
without human beings, with caves and dales, 
always covered with snow, and inaccessable 
by ordinary men even in thought. 

22. The great bird, carrying the bough 
the elephant and the tortoise, proceeded in 
great speed towards that moun tain of broad 
waist. 

23. The great bough with which the 
huge bird flew away could be girt round 
with a cord made of a hundred hides. 

24. The king of the birds, Garuda, flew 
away one hundred thousand yoyonas in 
the shortest time. 

25. Going almost within a moment to the 
mountain as directed by his father, the bird 
let fall the great bough. And it fell with a 
great noise. 

26. That king of the mountains trembled
having been struck with the storm, raised 
by Garuda's wings. The trees thereon 
dropped showers of flowers. 

27. And the peaks of that great mountain 
decked with gems and gold, were loosened 
and fell down on all sides. 

28. The falling bough struck down many 
trees, which, with golden flowers amid their 
dark leaves, looked like clouds charged 
with lightning. 

29. And these trees, bright as gold, 
falling down upon the ground and dyed 
with the mountain metals, looked as if they 
were bathed in the rays of the sun. 

30. Then the best of birds sat on the 
summit of that mountain and ate both the 
elephant and the tortoise. 

31. The son of Tarksha (Garuda), having 
thus eaten the elephant and the tortoise, 
rose on his wings from the top of that moun¬ 
tain summit. 

32. Various evil omens appeared before 
the celestials foreboding fear. Indra’s thunder 
bolt biased up in a fright. 

33_34. Meteors with flames and smoke, 

loosened from the welkin, shot down during 
the day; and the weapons of the Vasus, 
the Rudras, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the 
Maruts and of all other classes of celestials 
began to fight among one another, 

35. Such things had never happened, 
_no, not even during the war between the 
Devas and the Danavas. The winds blew 
with thunder; meteors fell in thousands; 

36. The cloudless sky made a tremen¬ 
dous roar. Even he who was the god of 
she gods, dropped blood. 

37. The garlands in the necks of the 
celestials grew pale and dim, and their splen¬ 
dour was lost. And terrible masses of 
clouds vomitted thick showers of blood. 

38. The dust, raised by the winds, dark 
ened thesplendour of the coronets worn by the 
celestials. Thereupon, Indra with the other 
celestials, perpiexea with fear on account of 
these evil omens, addressed Vrihaspati 
thus. 

Indra said 

39. O illustrious one, why have these 
great disasters suddenly arisen ? I do not 
see any enemy who will oppress us in a 
war.  

Vrihaspati said:— 

40. O king of the celestials, O Satakratu, 
it is from your carelessness and from 
your fault, and owing to the penances of the 
illustrious Rishi Valuchilyas, 

41. That the son of the Rishi Kashyapa 
and Vinata, the great bird, capable of assu¬ 
ming any form at will, is coming to take 
away the Soma. 

42. And the strongest of all the strong, 
that bird is capable of taking away the 
Soma . Everything is possible in him. He 
can achieve even the unachievable. 

Sauti said 

43. Having heard this, Indra spoke to 
those that guarded the Ambrosia, 4  A 
greatly powerful bird has determined to 
take away the Soma ; 

44. I warn you beforehand, so that he 
may not succeed in taking it by force. 
Vrihaspati has told me that his strength is 
matchless.” 

45. The celestials, when they heard it, 
were astonished, and they took precautions. 
They stood surrounding the Ambrosia, 
and the greatly powerful Indra stood with 
them,tnunder-bolt in hand. 

46. The celestials wore wonderful and 
greatly valuable breast-plates of gold,-set 
with gems; 

47. They wore bright leather armours 
of great toughness, and wielded various 
sharp weapons of terrible forms, 

48. All emitting fire with smoke, and all 
raised up by the best of the celestials. 

49. They were armed with many 
discuses, iron maces, spikes, lances, tridents, 
battle-axes and various other sharp-pointed 
misseles, polished swords and macesof 
terrible forms, all suited to their respective 
bodies. 

50. Armed with these bright weapons 
and adorned with all celestial ornaments, 
the celestials, having their fear allayed, 
waited there (ready to meet Garuda). 

51. The celestials of matchless strength, 
energy and splendour, capable of splitting 
the cities of the Asuras, displayed them¬ 
selves in forms resplendent as tne blazing 
fire; they all resolved to protect the Am¬ 
brosia (at all hazard). 

52. And in consequence of the celestials’ 
standing there, and owing to hundreds of 
thousands of maces furnished with iron 
spokes, that battle-field looked like another 
firmament illuminated by the rays of the 
sun. 

thus ends the thirtieth Section , Sattparna, 
in the Adi Parva, 


Section 31

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Saunaka said:— 

1. O son of Suta, what was the fault 
of Indra and what was his carelessness  
How was Garura born owing to the penances 
of the Valikhilyas

2. Why had Kashyapa, a Brahmana, the 
king of the birds for his son ? Why was he 
invincible of all creatures and indestructible 
of all 

3. Why was that bird capable of going 
every where and mastering any measuse of 
strength at will 7 I am willing to hear 
all this, if they are narrated in the Puranas. 

Sauti said:— 

4. What you ask me is narrated in the 
Puranas. O Brahmana, listen to them. I 
shall briefly narrate-them all. 

5. When Prajapati Kashyapa from the 
desire of begetting offspring was engaged in 
a sacrifice, the Rishis, the Devas, and the 
Gandharvas all gave him help. 

6. Indra with Valikhilya Rishis and 
other celestials were appointed by Kashyapa 
to bring fuel for the sacrifice. 

7. And Lord Indra, taking up according 
to his great strength a weight which was 
mountain-like, brought it without any fatigue. 

8 . He saw on the way some Rishis, 
as small in size as the thumb, carrying one 
single stalk of Palasa leaf all together. 

9. They were exceedingly lean for want 
of food, and they were much distressed when 
they fell into an indentation in the road 
caused by the hoop of a cow. 

10. Purander (Indra), madly proud of 
his strength, saw them with surprise, and 
laughing at them in derision, passed them,
crossing over their heads, and thus grossly 
insulting them. 

11. On this the Rishis became exceed¬ 
ingly angry and was filled with sorrow. 
They began a great act which was a terror 
to Indra. 

12. Hear, Sir, these excellent Rishis 
poured ghee in the sacrificial fire loudly 
reciting Mantras, saying, 

13. “There will be another Indra of all 
the celestials, capable of going everywhere 
at will, mustering any measure of strength 
at will and imparting fear to the present 
Indra. 

14. By the fruit of our penances, let there 
be born an I ndra fearfully strong and fleet 
as the mind.” 

15. The Lord of the celestials Satakratu, 
becoming very much alarmed, went to.ask 
the protection of the great ascetic, the self- 
controlled Rishi Kashyapa. 

16. Prajapati Kashyapa, having heard 
every thing from Indra, went to the Vali¬ 
khilyas, and asked whether their act had 
been successful. 

17. thus addressed, those truthful Rishis 
said, “ Yes, it is done.” Then Prajapati 
Kashyapa pacified them and said, 

18. “ The present Indra has been 
appointed the lord of the three worlds by 
Brahma. O Rishis you are also trying to 
create another Indra. 

19. O excellent men, you should not 
make the words of Brahma untrue, and I 
too do not wish to make your desire futile. 

20. Let there be an Indra of the winged 
creatures, endued with great strength. Be 
gracious to Indra who is suppliant to you.” 

21. Having been thus addressed by 
Kashyapa, the Valikhilya Rishis: saluted the 
great Prajapati and spoke thus, 

The Valikhilyas said 

22. O Prajapati, our this action 
(penance) is for creating an Indra. It is 
also meant for a son being born to you. 

23. Let this successful act be accepted by 
you ; and in this matter, do whatsoever you 
think good and proper. 

Sauti said 

24-25. At this time, the good and illus¬ 
trious daughter of Daksha, named Vinata, 
being desirous of having an offspring and 
having pruified herself by bathing after 
her season of impurity, came to her husband; 
and Kashyapa spoke to her thus, 

26. “O lady, the sacrifice, commenced 
by me, has borne fruit. What you 
desired to get, you will get. Two heroic sons 
will be born in you who will be the lords of 
the three worlds. 

27. Owing to the penances of the Vali- 
khilyas, and by virtue of the desire with 
which I had began ray sacrifice, those sons 
will be of exceeding good fortune, and they 
will be worshipped by the three worlds.” 

28. The illustrious Kashyapa again 
spoke to her, “ Carefully bear these auspi¬ 
cious seeds. 

29. These two will be the lords of all the 
winged creatures. They will be birds, cap¬ 
able of assuming any form at will, and they 
will be great heroes, respected by all the 
worlds.” 

30. The. Prajapati then addressed 
Indra thus,—“You will have two brothers 
of great power and strength, who will be 
your helps. 

31. O Purander, by them will no injury 
be done to you. Let your sorrow cease. 
O Indra, you will remain as .the only one 
Indra in the world. 

32. But let not the utterers of Brahma, 
Brahmanas be ever slighted by you. Let 
not those, whose words are like the thunder¬ 
bolt, be again insulted by you.” 

33. Having been thus addressed, Indra, 
his fear being dispelled, went to heaven ; 
and Vinata was much pleased, because her 
desire was accomplished. 

34. She gave birth to two sons, Aruna 
and Garuda, and the undeveloped-bodied 
Aruna became the fore-runner (charioteer) 
of the sun. 

35. Garuda became the king of the birds. 
O descendent of Brigu, listen to his great 
deeds. 

thus ends the thirty first chapter, Sau - 
parna , in the Adi Parva. 


Section 32
(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti  said 

1. O best of the twice born, the celes¬ 
tials, having stood prepared for battle (in 
the way already narrated), the king of tne 
birds Garuda soon came upon them. 

2. The celestials, having seen him of 
excessive strength, began to tremble in fear ; 
and (having been confused) struck one 
an0ther with all their weapons. 

3. Amongst those that were guarding 
the Soma was Bhaumana (Viswakarma) of 
matchless strength and of great energy. 
He was as effulgent as the electric fire. 


4. But after a moment’s fight he lay 
as dead, mangled by the king of the bird 
with his beaks, talons and wings. 

5. The great bird, darkening the worlds 
with the dust raised by the great storm 
created by his wings, overwhelmed the 
celestials. 

6. Having been overwhelmed wjth that 
dust, the celestials fainted away. Those that 
were guarding the Ambrosia could not 
see Garuda on account of the dust. 

7. thus Garuda agitated the 'celestial 
regions and mangled the celestials with his 
wings and beaks. 

8. Thereupon the celestial, the god of 
thousand eyes (Indra), commanded Vayu, 
saying, “O Maruta, it is yonr work to drive 
the dust away.” 

9. Then the mighty Vayu drove the 
dust ; and when darkness thus disappeared, 
the celestials attacked the bird. 

10. When he was attacked by the 
celestials, he roared in the sky, like the great 
cloud, frightful to every creature. 

11-13. The greatly powerful king of 
birds, the slayer of enemies, rose on his 
wings and stayed in the sky over the heads 
of the celestials, with their lord Indra, who 
showered on him double edged swords, iron 
maces, sharp lances, bright arrows and 
discuses of the form of the sun. Being thus 
attacked from every side, 

14. The king of birds faught the great 
battle without being weary for a moment, and 
the greatly powerful son of Vinata, blazing 
in the sky, attacked the celestials on all sides 
by his wings and breast, and scattered them 
in all directions. 

15. Mangled by the talons and the beaks 
of Garuda, copious blood began to flow from 
the bodies of the celestials. 

16. thus overcome by the king of birds, 
the Sadhyas fled with the Gandharvas 
towards the east, the Vasiis with the Rudras 
towards the south, 

17. The Adityas towards the west, and 
the Ashwinis towards the north. Gifted 
with great powers, they retreated fighting, 
and looking back every moment at their 
enemy. 

18-19. Garuda faught with the greatly 
courageous Ashwakranda, and Ranuka, 
the bold Krathana, and Tapana, (Jluka 
and Sashana, Nemesha, Puruja and 
Pulina. 

20. The son of Vinata mangled them 
with his wings, talons and beaks, like the 
chastiser of foes, the angry Pinaki (Siva) 
at the end oi the Yuga. 

21. Those greatly powerful and energe¬ 
tic celestials, mangled all over by that great 
bird, looked like masses of black clouds, 
dropping showers of blood. 

22. thus making the celestials almost 
dead, the best of the birds went where the 
Ambrosia was. He saw it surrounded on 
all sides by fire. 

23. The terrible flames of that fire 
covered whole of the sky, and moved by 
violent winds, they bent on burning the 
very sun. 

24-25. The illustrious Garuda assumed 
ninety times ninety mouths, and drinking in 
many rivers by those mouths, and coming 
back in great speed, having wings for his 
vehicle, extinguished the fire with those 
rivers’ water. And extinguishing that fire, 
he assumed a very small form, wishing to 
enter into the place where the Ambrosia 
was. 

thus ends the thirty second chapter, Sau - 
parna, in the Adi Parva . 

Section 33

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued, 

Sauti said 

1. The great bird, assuming a golden 
body, bright as the ravs of the sun, entered 
(where the Soma was; with great force as a 
torrent enters the sea. 

2. He saw near the Ambrosia a wheel, 
keen-edged and sharp as the razor, revolving 
incessantly (round it.) 

3. And that fearful instrument of fearful 
form, as blazing as the blazing Sun, w r as 
skilfully created by the celestials to cut 
down the robbers of the Ambrosia. 

4. The great bird saw a passage through 
it, and stopped for a while. Diminishing nis 
body within an instant, he passed through 
the spokes of that wheel. 

5—6. He beheld, within the lirte of the 
wheel, stationed there to guard tne Soma , 
two great snakes blazing as the blazing 
fire, having tongues Jike lightning, power 
incomparable, face and eyes emitting fire, 
poisonous, terrible, always in anger and 
always in activity. 

7. Their eyes were winkless and always 
inflamed in anger. He who was even seeft 
by any of the two was instantly reduced to 
ashes. 

8. The great bird (Suparna) suddenly 
covered their eyes with dust, and .thus 
making them blind, he attacked them from 
all sides. 


9. The son of Vinata, that ranger of the 
sky, attacking their bodies, mangled them 
into pieces ; and he then without the least 
delay came to the place where the Soma was. 

10. The mighty son of Vinata, taking 
up the Ambrosia from the place where it 
was, rose on his wings, breaking the instrument
into pieces. 

11. He soon came out, but he did not 
drink the Ambrosia. He then proceeded on 
his way without the least fatigue, darkening 
the splendour of the sun. 

12. The son of Vinata then saw Vishnu 
on his way in the sky, and Narayana was 
pleased with him for his seif-denial. 

13. The undeterring Diety said to the 
great bird, I am willing to grant you a 
boon.” Thereupon the bird said, I want to 
stay above you.” 

14. He again said to Narayana, I want 
to be imortal, and free from disease without 
drinking the Ambrosia.” 

15. Vishnu said to the son of Vinata, 
44 Be it so.” Receiving these two boons, 
Garuda said to Vishnu, 

16. I shall also grant you a boon.” 
Thereupon Vishnu asked the mighty carrier 
of great weights to become his vehicle. 

17. He placed the bird on the flag-staff of 
his car saying, 44 thus shall you stay above 
me.” And the bird said to Narayana 
Be it so,” 

18. Mocking the wind with fleetness, he 
then swiftly proceeded on his way, and when 
the great bird was thus going away, Indra 
hurled at him his thunder-bolt. 

19. The best of birds, Garuda, when 
carrying away the Ambrosia, was thus struck 
with the thunder-bolt; and being greatly 
angry, he laughingly spoke to Indra 

20. In sweet words, I shall respect the 
Rishi, with whose bones the thunder-bolt is 
made. 

21. I shall respect the thunder-bolt and 
you also. O Indra, I cast a feather of mine, 
end of which even you will never find. 

22. I have not felt the slightest pain 
being,struck by your thunder-bolt.” Having 
said this, the king of Birds threw out one 
of his feathers. 

23—24. Seeing that beautiful feather, 
cast by Garuda, all creatures became exceedingly pleased, 
and they said, “Let this 
bird be called Suparna (bird with beautiful 
feathers).” Seeing this, the diety of thousand eyes
Porandar, was much surprised, 
and he thought he must be a great 
being. He then addressed him thus. 


Indra said 

25. " O best of birds, I desire to know 
the limit of your strength. I also desire 
to form an eternal friendship with you. 

thus ends the thirty third chapter

Section 34

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Garada said 

1. ” O Purander, Let there be friend¬ 
ship between us as you desire. Know, my 
strength is great and is hard to bear. 

2. O Satakratu, the learned do not ap¬ 
prove of speaking highly of their own 
strength or of their own merits. 

3. O friend, as we are now made friends, 
and as you ask me, I will tell you, although 
self-praise without reason is always im¬ 
proper. 

4. O Indra, I can bear, on a single fea¬ 
ther of mine, this earth with her mountains 
forests, oceans, and even you with it. 

5. Know, my strength is such that I 
can bear, without fatigue, even all the worlds 
put together, with their mobile and immobile 
objects. 

Sauti said 1— 

6. O Saunaka, when the great hero 
(Garuda) said all this, the great Lord, 
the king of the celestials, the wearer of the 
heaven's crown, the possessor of wealth, the 
benefactor of all the worlds said :— 

7. M It is true what you say. Every 
thing is possible in you. Accept now my 
sincere and eternal friendship. 

8. If you do not require the Soma , kindly 
return it to me. Those to whom you will 
give it will always quarrel with us. 

Garada said 

9. There is a reason why I am taking 
away the Soma . I shall not give the Soma 
to any body to drink. 

10. O diety of thousand eyes, after I 
shall place it down, O king of heavens, you 
can instantly take it up and bring it away. 

Indra said:— 

11. .O oviparous One, I am highly 
pleased with wnat you have just now said. 
O best of birds, accept from me any boon 
you like to have. 

Sauti said 

' 12. Being thus addressed, Garyda 
recollecting the sons of Kadru and the slavery 
of his mother by dteeptien said, 


13. u though I have power to do every 
thing over all creatures, yet, O Indra, 
I shall do your bidding. Let the mighty 
snakes be my food.” 

14. 14 Be it so,” said the destroyer of the 
Danavas, and he went to Hari, the god of 
gods, the great Soul, the lord of Yogis. 

I>. He (Vishnu) sanctioned all that was 
said by Garuda. The illustrious lord of all 
the worlds thus spoke to him, 

16. ”1 shall take away the Soma when 
ou will place it down.” Having said this 
e bade farewell to Garuda, And Supama 

(Garuda) went to the presence of his mother 
with great speed. 

17. He (hen said to all the snakes in 
joy, " Here have I brought the Ambrosia. 
I shall place it on the (sacred) Kusha grass. 

18. O snakes, drink it after performing 
your ablutions and religious rites. I have 
done what you asked me to do. 

19—20. therefore as you promised, let my 
mother becamofree from this day.” "Be it so, 
said the snakes and went to perform their 
ablutions. In the meantime, Indra taking 
up the Ambrosia, went away to heaven. 

21. The snakes, after performing their 
ablutions, their daily devotions, ana other 
sacred rites, came in joy to drink the 
Ambrosia. 

22. They saw that the Kusha grass on 
which the Ambrosia had been placed was 
empty. It had been taken away by a counter 
act of deception. 

23. They began to lick with their tongues 
the Kusha grass in which the Ambrosia had 
been placed ; and by that act, their tongues 
became divided jnto two. 

24. The Kusha grass, from the contact of 
the Ambrosia, became sacred from that day. 
thus did the illustrious Garuda bring the 
Ambrosia, and bring it for the snakes, but 
thus were their tongues divided by what he 
did. 

25. Then Supama (Garuda) lived in 
that forest with his mother in great joy. The 
son of Vinata delighted Ms -mother by be¬ 
coming |ffe eater of snakes, by being res- 
pecteppy all birds and by doing other great 
acts." 

2$. He, who will listen to this story or 
read it to an assembly of Brahmanas, must 
surely go to heaven, acquiring great merit 
from its recitation. 

thus ends the thirty fourth Section , the 
conclusion of Saupama , in the Adt Parva . 


Section 35

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continutd. 

S&unaka said:— 

1. O son of Suta, you have told us why 
the snakes were cursed by their mother; ana 
why Vinata also cursed her son. 

2. You have told us the bestowal of 
boons on Kadru and Vinata by their 
husband ; you have also told us the names of 
the two sons of Vinata. 

3. O son of Suta, you have not told us 
the names of the snakes (the sons of Kadru). 
We are anxious to know the names of 
the chief ones. 

Sauti said 

4. O Risbi, for fear of being lengthy, I 
shall not mention the names of all the snakes. 
But hear, I shall only mention the names of 
the chief ones. 

5-16. Shesha was born first and then 
Vasuki. (There were born) Airavata, Tak- 
shaka, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kalakeya, 
Mani, Purana, Pinjaraka, Elapatra, Vama- 
na, Nila Anila, Kalamasha, Savala, Aryaka, 
Ugraka, Kalaspotaka, Suramukha, Dodhi- 
mukha, Vimalapindaka, [Apta, Karotaka, 
Sankha, Valisikha, Nisthanaka, Himaguha, 
Nahusa, Pin gala, Vahyakama, Hastipada, 
Mudgarapindaka, Kamvala, Ashwatara, 
Kalijaka, Vritta, Samvartaka, Padma, 
Mahapadma, Sankhamukha, Kusharaan- 
daka, Kshemaka, Pindaraka, Karavira, 
Pushpadanshtraka, Vilwaka, Vilwapandara, 
Mushikada, Sankhasiras, Pumabhadra, 
Haridraka, Aparajita, Jyotika, Srivaha, 
Kauravya, Dhriurastra, Sankhapinda, 
Virajas, Suvahu, Salipinda, Probhakara, 
Hastipinda, Pith&raka, Sumukha, Kauna- 
pashana, Kuthara, Kunjara, Kumuda, Ku- 
mudakshya, Tettiri, HaJika, Kardama, 
Vahumulaka, Karakara, Akarkara, Kundo- 
dara and Mahodara. 

17. O best of the twice-born, I have told 
you the names of the chief snakes. For fear 
of being tedious, I haye not told you the 
names of the rest. 

18. O Rishi, the sons and the grand¬ 
sons of the snakes were innumerable, there¬ 
fore, I shall not mention their names to 
you. 

19. O Rishi, the number of snakes 
defies calculation in this world. There are 
many thousands and millions of the snakes. 

thus ends the thirty fifth chapter, Astika , 
4n the Adi Parva . 


Section 36

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Saunaka said 

1. O child, you have told us of many 
greatly powerful and unconquerable serpents. 
What did they do after hearing of the 
curse ? 

Sauti said 

2. Illustrious and famous Shesha, having 
left (his mother) Kadru, practised austere 
penances, living on air and rigidly observing 
vows, 

3. He practised his penances, going 
to Gandhamadana, Vadari, Gokarna, the 
forest of Pushkara and the foot of the Hi¬ 
malayas. 

4. He passed his days in these sacred 
places, rigidly observing his vows, complete¬ 
ly controlling his passions and concentrating 
his mind. 

5. The Grandsire saw him with knotted 
hair, clad in rags, his flesh, skin and senews 
dried up owing to the austere penances be 
was practising. 

6. The Grandsire, addressing that penance
practising ascetic, said, “ O Shesha, 
what are you doing ? let the welfare of the 
worlds also engage your thoughts. 

7. O sinless one, you are giving pain to 
all creatures by your austere penances. O 
Shesha, tell me the desire of your mind’ 

Shesha said 

8. My brothers are all of wicked hearts. 
I do not wish to live with them. Kindly 
sanction this. 

9. They are jealous of one another like 
great enirtiies. I am, therefore, engaged in 
penances. I shall not even see them. 

10. They never show any kindness for 
Vinata and her son, who is our other 
brother, the bird of the air. 

11. They always envy him. He too is 
much stronger than (all of us), owing to the 
boon granted by our father, the illustrious 
and noble Kashyapa. 

12. therefore, I am practising penances, 
and I shall cast off this body of mine, so 
that I may not live with them even in 
another life. 

Sauti said:— 

13. When Shesha thus smite, die 
Grandsire told, him, “O Shesha,4 know the 
character of your brothers.

14 (And i know also) their great dan¬ 
ger owing to their offence against their 
mother. O snake, a remedy has been 
already provided by me. 

15. You should not grieve for your 
brothers. O Shesha, whatever you desire 
poto ssess, ask it from me. 

16. I am highly pleased with you and 
I shall grant you a boon to-day. O best of 
snakes, it is very good that your heart has 
been set on virtue. Let your heart be more 
and more firmly set on virtue.” 

Shesha said:— 

17. O divthe Grandsire, O lord of all, I 
ask this boon,—let my heart always delight in 
virtue and in blessed penances. 

Brahma said 

18. O Shesha, I am highly pleased with 
your self-denial and love of peace. By 
my command let the following act be done 
by you for the good of all creatures. 

19. Bearing properly and well, this earth 
which is so very unsteady, towns retreats 

and seas, with all her mountains and forests 
with her O Shesha, remain in the way as she 
may be steady. 

Shesha said:— 

20. O divine lord of all creatures, O 
rranter of boons, O lord of the earth, O the 
lord of every created thing, O the lord of 
the universe, I shall hold the earth steady, 
as you command. O Prajapati, place it 
upon my head. 

Brahma said 

21. O best of snakes, go underneath the 
earth. She herself will make a passage for 
you. O Shesha, you will certainly do what 
is highly valued by me by holding the earth 
(on your head.) 

Sauti said 

33. The elder brother of the king of the 
snakes, entering into a hole, went to the 
other side of the earth. He held that goddess
(earth) with her belt of seas all around 
her. 

Brahma said:— 

23. O Shesha, the best of snakes, you 
Are the Dharma, because you hold the 
earth alone with your huge body, with 
every thing on her, what I myself and 
s Indra can do. 

Bonti said:— 

34. thus does the snake, Shesha, the 
greatly powerful lord Ananta, supporter of
the earth, alone supporting the world 
at the oofnmsnd of (Brahma. 

35 Then the Grandsire, the illustrious 
lord of the immortals , gave unto Ananta for 
his help the son of Vinata, Garuda.


Section 37

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. The best of snakes, Vasuki, bearing 
the curse of his mother, pondered over how 
to make it abortive. 

2. He held a consultation with all his 
brothers, Airayata and others, who were 
virtuous. 

Vasuki said:— 

3. O sinless ones, the curse on us is well- 
known to you. We should try to neutralise 
it. 

4. Remedies exist for all curses, but no 
remedy can avail those who are cursed by 
their mother. 

5. Hearing that this curse was uttered 
before the immutable, the Infinite and the 
true one, my heart trembles. 

6. Our annihilation has certainly come ; 
otherwise the immutable Lord should have 
prevented our mother from uttering the 
curse. 

7. therefore, let us consult to-day how we 
may secure the safety of the snakes. Let 
us not waste time. 

8. You are aH wise and discerning. 
We shall all consult together, and find out a 
means of deliverence, 

9. As did the celestials, m the days of 
yore, to regain the lost Agni whofhad conceal¬ 
ed himself within a cave, so that the sacrifice 
of lanamejaya for the destruction of the 
snakes may not take place, and so that we 
may not meet with our destruction. 

8onti said

so. thus addressed, all the offspring of 
Kadru assembled together; they were all 
wise in counsel, and they gave their opinions 
(one after the other.) 

n» One party said, ” We shall assume 
the guise of Brahmana Risbis and asked 
Janamejaya not to hold the sacrifice.” 

12. Others, thinking themselves wise, 
said, “ We shall all become his favourite 
counsellors. 

13. He will then certainly ask our advice 
in all things, and we shall then give him such 
advice as may obstruct die sacrifice. 

14. fhe king, thinking Us wise, will 
certainly ask our advice about his sacrifice, 
and we shall say, ” Don't hold it.” 

15. We shall point hinaoui many serious 
evils in this world and the next, with reasons 
and causes, so that the sacrifice may not 
take place. 


16—17. (We can do this also) ; let one 
of the snakes by biting kill the persons, who 
will try to do good to the king, and who 
will be well-acquainted with the rites of the 
Snake-sacrifice and who will be appointed 
as the sacrificial priest. And by their death, 
the sacrifice will not be completed. 

18. We shall also bite those who are 
acquainted with the Snake-sacrifice and who 
may be appointed as the Ritwijas of the 
sacrifice. thus we shall obtain our object.” 

19. Some other snakes, who were kind- 
hearted and virtuous, said, Your advice 
is not good. It is not proper to kill 
Brahmanas.” 

20. That remedy is proper in a danger 
which rests on righteousness. Unrighteous¬ 
ness finally destroys the world.” 

21. Other snakes said:—“ We shall 
estinguish the sacrificial fire by becoming 
clouds luminous with lightning, and pouring 
down showers.” 

22. Other good snakes said, ” Let us go 
in the night and steal away the vessel of the 
Soma . This will obstruct the sacrifice. 

23. Or let the snakes go in hundreds and 
thousands to the sacrifice, bite every one, 
and thus create a terror. 

24. Or let the serpents defile the pure 
food with their urine and dung.” 

25. Others said, 11 Let us become the 
Rit'wijas of the king and obstruct the 
sacrifice by saying at the very outset,—'Give 
us our Dnakshina.” 

26. The king, being placed in our power, 
will do whatever we will ask him to do.” 
Other said, 41 When the king will play in the 
waters, 

27. Let us cany him to our home and 
kept him bound, so that the sacrifice may 
not take place. Others, thinking them¬ 
selves wise, said, 

28. ” Let us go to the king and bite him, 
so that Qur object may be accomplished. By 
his death the root of all evil will be des¬ 
troyed. 

29. O snake, that hears by the eyes, this 
is the final result of our deleberations. O 
king, do speedily what you think proper. 

30. Having said this, they all eagerly 
looked at the best of the snakes, Vasuki. 
And Vasuki, after reflecting a while, told 
the snakes, 

31. O snakes, your this final determina¬ 
tion does not seem worthy of adoption. 
The advice, that you all give, are not to 
my liking. 

32. What can I suggest which would be 
for your good ! I think the favour of (our 
father) the illustrious Kashyapa can alone 
do us good . 

33. O snakes, my mind does not know 
which of your suggestions to adopt for the 
welfare of my race and mine. 

34. It is this that makes me so anxious, 
for the credit and the discredit of the act 
will rest on me alone. 

thus ends the thirty-seventh Section 
Astika, in the Ardi Parva . 


Section 38

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Strati said 

1. Having heard the words that fell 
from the snakes and also what fell from 
Vasuki, Elapatra addressed them thus, 

2. “ That sacrifice is not such as would 
be prevented, and Janamejaya of the 
Panaava race, who is our great terror, is not 
such as he can be obstructed. 

3. O King, he who is afflicted by Fate, 
has his recourse to Fate alone. Nothing 
else can be his refuge. 

4. O best of the snakes, the root of our 
terror is Fate, and therefore, Fate alone 
must be our refuge. Listen to what I say. 

5—6. O best of the snakes, when that 
curse was uttered, i lay in fear, crouching on 
my mother’s lap. O best of the snakes, O 
Lord, O snake of great splendour, I heard 
from that place the sorrowing gods speaking 
to the Grandsire saying, 

The Celestials said 

7. O Grandsire, O god of gods, who 
but Kadru, after getting such dear children, 
can curse them even in your presence ! 

8. O Grandsire, you have also said, 11 Be 
it so.” We wish to know the reason why 
you did not prevent her. 

Brahma said 

9. The snakes have multiplied, they are 
cruel, terrible in form, and deadly poison¬ 
ous. I did not prevent Kadru (from utter¬ 
ing the curse) from the desire of doing 
good to all creatures. 

10. The poisonous serpents that have 
always the Diting propensity, those that 
bite for little faults, and those who are 
sinful, will be destroyed, but not those 
that are virtuous. 

11. Hear, how the snakes may escape 
from this dreadful calamity when the time 
will come. 


12. There will be born in the race of 
Yayavaras t a great Rishi, known by the 
name of Jaratkaru, who will be intelligent, 
greatly ascetic and self-controlled. 

13. That Jaratkaru will have a son, 
named Astika, who will also be a great 
Rishi. He will put a stop to the Snake- 
sacrifice. Those snakes tnat will be virtu¬ 
ous will escape (from the Snake-sacrifical 
fire.) 

The Celestials said 

14. O Brahma, in whom will Jaratkaru, 
the foremost of the Rishis, gifted with great 
powers and asceticism, beget that illustrious 
son .

Brahma said:— 

15. The best of Brahmanas, the greatly 
powerful (Jaratkaru) will beget a greatly 
powerful son on his wife who will bear the 
same name as his. 

16. Vasuki, the king of the snakes, has 
a sister, named Jaratkaru ; the son I speak 
of will be born in her womb, and he will 
save the snakes. 

Elapatra said 

17. The celestials said to the Grandsire, 
“Be it so and the lord Brahma, having 
said all this to the celestials went to heaven. 

18—19. O Vasuki, I see before me your 
that sister, known by the name of Jaratkaru. 
To save us from this great calamity, give 
her as a gift to the Rishi Jaratkaru of rigid 
vows, who will roam about begging fora 
bride. This means of our safety has been 
heard by me. 

thus ends the thirty eighth Section , 
Astika , in the Adi Parva. 


Section 39

(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti said 

t. O best of the twice born, hearing 
what Elapatra said, all the snakes exclaimed 
in joy, "Well said! Excellent man!

2. From that day Vasuki carefully 
kept that maiden, his sister Jaratkaru, and 
he took great pleasure in rearing her up. 

3. Not long after this, the Devas and 
the Asuras churned the abode of Vanina 
(Ocean.) 

4. And the greatly powerlul Vasuki 
became its churning cord. As soon as this 
work was done, he appeared before the 
grandsire. 


5. The celestials with Vasuki addressed 
the Grandsire thus ,— O lord, Vasuki is 
suffering from the fear of the curse. 

6. You should draw out the dart, be¬ 
gotten by bis mother's curse, which pierces 
the heart of Vasuki who is desirous of the 
weal of his race. 

7. The king of the snakes is always our 
friend and benefactor , O lord of the gods, be 
gracious to him, and remove the fever of his 
mind. 

Brahma said 

8—9. O immortals, I have thought in my 
mind what you have said. Let the king of the 
snakes do what Elapatra had told him before. 
The time has come. The wicked only will 
be destroyed, and not the virtuous. 

10. Jaratkaru is (already) born; that 
Brahmana is now engaged in penances. 
Let him (Vasuki), at the proper time, give 
his sister to Jaratkaru. 

11. O celestials, what had been said by 
Elapatra for the weal of the snakes is true. 
It is not otherwise. 

Sauti said 

12. The king of the snakes, afflicted with 
the curse, having heard what the Grandsire 
said, commanded all the snakes,— 

13. A large number of them who are 
always attentive to their duties,—to watch 
the Rishi Jarakaru. He said,— 

14. “When the Lord jaratkaru will 
ask for a wife, come immediately and in¬ 
form me of it. The weal of our race depends 
upon it.’ 

thus ends the thirty-ninth Section , 
Astika, in the Adi Parva, 


Section 40

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Saunaka said— 

I—2. O son of Suta, I desire to know 
why the illustrious Rishi whom you call 
Jaratkaru came to be so called You 
should tell us the etymology of the name of 
Jaratkaru. 

Sauti said 

3—4. Jara, means waste, Kara 
means ‘huge'. The body of this Rishi was 
huge, but he reduced it by severe penances. 
O Brahmana, because he thus reduced his 
body, he was called Jaratkaru, The sister of 
Vasuki was called Jaratkaru for the same 
reason. 

5. When the pious Saunaka heard this, 
he smiled, and addressing Ugrasrava (Sauti) 
said, may it be true.

Satmaka said 

6. I have heard all that you have narrat¬ 
ed. Now I wish to hear how Astika was 
born. 

Sauti said:— 

7. Vasuki, wbhing to bestow his sister 
on Rishi Jaratkaru, gave the snakes (all 
necessary) orders. 

8. Many years rolled away, but the 
Rishi of rigid vows, deeply engaged in 
ascetic devotions, did not seek for a wife. 

9. That high-souled Rishi, his sexual 
passion completely under control, engaged in 
.deep study and devoted to rigid asceticism, 
fearlessly roamed over the world, having no 
desire for a wife. 

10. O Brahmana, once upon a time there 
was a king, named Parikshit, born in the 
race of the Kurus. 

11. He was like his grandfather, mighty 
in arms, the best of all bow-men in battle, 
.and was very fond of hunting. 

12. That king of the world roamed 
about, bunting deer, wild boars, hyena and 
bufalloes, ana various other wild animals. 

13. One day, having pierced a deer with 
an arrow, he slang his bow on his back and 
entered into a deep forest. 

14. He searched for it In the forest here 
and there, as Rudra did in heaven for the 
sacrificial deer which was pierced with hb 
arrow. 

15. Never had a deer, pierceed by 
Parikshit, escaped in the forest with life. 
Thb deer, however, wounded as the others, 
were fled away with speed. It shows the 
proximity of the king's going to heaven 
(death). 

16. The deer, that the king of men, 
Parikshit wounded, was soon lost out of his 
sight, and the king went in pursuit it far into 
the forest. 

17—19. Fatigued and thirsty he came 
Upon a Rishi, in the forest, seated in a cow¬ 
shed, drinking the froth oozing out of the 
mouths of the calves sucking the milk of their 
mothers. Coming to him with all haste, the 
king asked that Rishi of great austerity, O
Branmana, I am king Parikshit, the son of 
Abhimanyu. 

20. Have you seen where the deer pierced 
ced by me has gone. But the Rishi, 
observing the vow of silence, did not reply to 
him. 

21. The king, being angry took up a 
dead snake with the end of hb bow and. 


placed it round the neck of the Rishi, but 
the Rishi did not prevent him from 
doing it. 

22—23. He did not even say a word, 
either good or bad. Seeing him in that state, 
the king cast off his anger and became very 
sorry. He went away to hb capitaf, arid 
the Rishi remained as he was. The 
forgiving great Rishi knowing him, that best 
of Kings, 

24—25. To be true to the duties of hb 
order, did not curse him. That best of 
kings, the best of the Bharata race, also did 
not know that the Rishi was a virtuous man. 
It is for this that he thus insulted him. This 
Rishi had a young, greatly powerful and 
exceedingly ascetic son, 

26—27. Who was named Sringi. He 
was full of wrath, severe in his vows and 
difficult to be appeased. He sometimes 
worshipped with great attention his 
(preceptor) Brahma, seated on hb seat and 
ever engaged in doing good to all creatures. 
Commanded by him, he was coming home 
one day, 

28—29. When his friend (Krisha) in a 
playful mood, laughingly spoke to him 
about his father. The Kishi’s son, ever 
wrathful and like poison itself, hearing what 
had happened to his father, blazed up in 
a rage, 

Krisha said 

30. O Sringi, do not be proud. Ascetic 
as you are and possessed of great powers, 
(go and see) your father is carrying a dead 
body (on his shoulder), 

31. Don't speak with the sons of the 
Rishis like ourselves, who are deep in 
asceticism, who have knowledge of Uruth 
and who have attained success. 

32. Where is your that manliness, and 
where are your those proud words, when you 
see your father carrying a dead snake ? 

33. O best of Rishis, your father did 
nothing to meet with this treatment. I am 
pained as if it has been done to me. 

thus ends the fortieth Section , Astika, in 
the Adi Parva . 


Section 41

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

i. Being thus addressed, and having 
heard that hb father was bearing a dead 
snake, the powerful Sringi grew exceedingly
angry. 

2. Looking at Krisha, he softly asked 
him, ” Why does my father bear a dead 
snake ?

Krisha said:— 

3. O dear friend, when Parikshit was 
roving for the purpose of hunting, he 
placed the dead snaxe on the shoulder of 
your father. 

Sringi said 

4. What harm was done by my father 
to that miscreant king? Tell me this, O 
Krisha, and (you will wen) see my ascetic 
powers. 

Krisha said 

5. King Parikshit, the son of Abhimanyu 
, having wounded a fleet stag with 
an arrow while hunting, chased it alone. 

6. He lost sight of the stag in the wilderness
of the forest, and seeing your father 
he accosted him. 

7. But he (your fa!her) was then observing
the vow of silence. Oppressed by hunger, 
thirst and fatigue, the king repeatedly asked 
your father about the missing deer. 

8. But the Rishi, being then under the 
vow of silence, did not make any reply. 
Thereupon the king, becoming angry, pierced 
the snake on his shoulder, taking it up wiih 
the end of his bow. 

9. O Sringi, your father, engaged in 
devotion, is still in that posture. The king 
has, however, gone away to his capital 
(Hastinapur), named after the elephant. 

Sauti said 

10. Having heard that a dead snake 
had been placed on his father’s shoulder, 
the Rishi’s son looked like a blazing fire, 
his eyes reddened with anger. 

11. Inflamed with anger, the powerful 
Rishi, touching water, cursed the king thus, 

Sringi said 

12..—14. He who has placed the dead 
snake on the shoulder of my old and lean 
father,—that miscreant of a king, that in- 
salter of the Brahmana;, the destroyer of the 
fame of the Kuru race,—will be taken within 
seven days from to-day to the land of Yama 
by the snake Takshaka, the powerful king 
of the serpents, stimulated by my words. 

Sauti said 

15. Having thus cursed the king from 
.anger, Sringi went to his father, and saw 
that he was sitting in the cow-shed, the dead 
snake (was still) on his shoulder. 

16. Seeing that the dead snake was on 
the shoulder of his father, he was agauu 
inflamed with anger. 

17. He shed tears in grief; and addres¬ 
sed his father thus, “O father, hearing the 
insult offered to you by the miscreant, 

18. King Parikshit, I have cursed him 
from anger. That wretch of the Kurus richly 
deserves my potent curse. Within seven 
days from this date the king of snake, 
Takshaka 

19. Will take the sinner to the fearful 
house of Death.” And the father said to the 
enraged son, 

Samika said:— 

20. O child, I am not pleased with your 
act. It is not proper for ascetics to act thus. 
We live in the domains of that king ; 

21. We are righteously protected by him, 
and therefore, we should not mind his faults 
The reigning kings should always be 
pardoned by men like us. 

22. O son, if you destroy Dharma, (piety), 
Dharma will certainly destroy you. If the 
king does not protect us, we meet with many 
afflictions. 

23. O son, we cannot then perform mu¬ 
re ligious rites as we desire. Protected by 
virtuous kings, 

24. We achieve great merits; and a share 
of it always goes to such kings. therefore, 
reigning kings are always to be forgiven ; 

25. Specially Parikshit, who, like his 
grandfather, protects us as a king should 
protect his subjects. 

26. That penance-practising king was 
oppressed by hunger and thirst, and he did 
not know that I was observing the vow of 
silence. 

27. Disasters always befall on a country 
where there is no king. The king punishes 
those who grow wicked. 

28. The fear of punishment brings in 
peace, and men thus perform their duties and 
their rites undisturbed. 

29. The king establishes the kindom of 
heaven. The king protects all sacrifices, 
and the sacrifices please the celestials ; 

30. The celestials cause rain, and rain 
ruduces medicinal herbs; the medicinal 
erbs do immense good to mankind. 

31. Manu said,—‘The ruler of the destiny 
of men is equal to ten Veda-knowing 
Brahmanas.’ 

32. That penance-observing king, op¬ 
pressed by hunger and thirst, has done this 
through ignorance of my vow. 

33. Why have you, through childishness, 
done rashly this unrighteous action ? O son, 
that king in no way deserves a curse from 
us. 

thus ends the forty first Section , Astika, 
in the Adi Parva . 


Section 42

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sringi said:— 

1. O father, whether my act was rash 
or improper, whether you like it or dislike 
it, the words spoken by me shall never be 
vain. 

2. O father, I tell you, this can never be 
otherwise. I have never spoken a lie even 
in jest. 

Samika said 

3. My child, I know, you are greatly 
werfu!, and you are very truthful. You 
ve never spoken a falsehood in your life, 

and therefore your curse will never be false. 

4. But the son, even when he is grown 
up, should always be adviced by his father, 
so that adorned with gpod qualities, he may 
earn great renown. 

5. You are mere child, and therefore, how 
much more do you stand in need of counsel! 
You are always engaged in asceticism. 
Even the anger of illustrious and high souled 
men increases with the increase of their 
powers. 

6. O best of pious men, considering that 
you are my son and a mere boy, and seeing 
your rashness, I see I must give you 
advice. 

7. Live, O son, having your mind 
inclined to peace ; live on fruits and roots of 
the forest. Destroy your anger; but do 
not destroy the fruits of your asceticism (by 
giving vent to anger.) 

8. Anger diminishes the merits that 
ascetics acquire with great pains. There 
is no hope for those who are deprived of 
virtue. 

9. Peacefulness produces success to 
the forgiving ascetics. Good come to the 
forgiving men, both in this world and in the 
next. 

10. therefore, you should always live, 
being forgiving m your temper and self- 
controlling of your passions, ny forgiveness 
you will attain to worlds that are beyond 
the reach of even Brahma. 

11. O my son, having adopted peaceful¬ 
ness, I shall do as much as lies in my power. 
I shall do this. I shall send words to the 
king, telling him, 

12. “O king, you have been cursed by 
my son, who is a mere child and whose 
intellect is not yet developed. Seeing your 
disrespect towards me, (he has done this) 
in anger.” 

Sauti said 

13. That great ascetic, observant of 
vows, moved by kindness, sent a disciple to 
Parikshit with proper instructions. 

14. He sent his disciple, named Gaurmukha, 
a young man of good manners and 
of ascetic penances, instructing him to 
enquire first about the welfare of the king, and 
then to communicate the real business. 

15. Going (to Hastinapur) he soon 
came to the king, the head of the Kuru race. 
He entered the king’s palace, having first 
sent the notice of nis arrival through a 
servant. 

16. The Brahmana, Gaurmukha, was 
received in all honours. And then after 
resting for a while, he told the king in the 
presence of his ministers, the terrible words 
of Samika, exactly as he was instructed. 

Gaurmukha said :— 

17. O king of kings, there lives within 
your dominions, a Rishi, named Shami- 

18—19. He is greatly virtuous, very 
peaceful, his passions under control, and a 
great ascetic. O best of men, a dead snake 
was placed by -'you with the end of your 
bow on the shoulder of this Rishi who was 
then observin, the vow of silence. He 
himself forgave the act, but his son did not. 

20. O king of kings, you have been 
to-day cursed by him without the knowledge 
of his father. Takshaka wiU be your death 
within seven nights. 

21. Shamika repeatedly asked his son 
to save you, but there is none to falsify his 
curse. 

22. As he has been unable to pacify his 
angry son, therefore, O king, I nave been 
sent by him to you for your good. 

Sauti  said:— 

23. Having heard these terrible words, 
and recollecting his own sinful act, the 
king, the descendant of the Kuru race, a 
great ascetic himself, grew exceedingly 
sorry. 

24. Having heard that the best of the 
Rishi (Shamika) had been observing the 
vow of silence, he was doubly afflicted with 
sorrow. 

25. Seeing 1 also the grdat kindness shown 
to him by the Rishi, and recollecting his 
own. great sinful act, the king became very 
penitant. 

26. The king, who looked like a celestial, 
did not grieve so much for hearing that he 
would die, as for having done that (insult¬ 
ing) act to the Rishi. 

27. The king then sent away Gaur- 
mukha, saying Let the adored Rishi be 
gracious to met" 

28. When Gaurmukha had gone away, 
the king in great anxiety consulted with all 
his ministers without delay. 

29. Having consulted with his ministers, 
the king himself, wise in counsels, caused a 
palace to be erected on a pillar, guarded 
day. and night by men. 

30. For his protection, he placed all 
around the palace, physicians, medicines 
and Brahmanas skilled in Mantras . 

31. thus being protected on all sides, 
king discharged nis royal duties, sur¬ 
rounded by his virtuous ministers. 

32. None could approach that best of 
kings there (in that palace.) The air even 
could not go there, being prevented from 
enterings.

33. When the seventh day came, the 
best of Brahmanas, Kashyapa, was coming 
with the intention of treating the king, (U 
bitten by the snake.) 

34. He had heard all that had happen¬ 
ed ; he had heard that the best of snakes, 
Takshaka would take the king to Yama’s, 
abode. 

35. He. thought, I will cure the king 
bitten by the best of the snakes. By this 1 
may gain both wealth and virtue.' 

36. The king of the snakes, Takshaka, 
saw on the way, Kashyapa, going with the 
intention of curing the king. He appeared 
before him in the form of a Brahmana. 

37. Thereupon the king of the snakes 
spoke to the best of the Rishis, Kashyapa 
saying, “Where are you going with such 
speed? What is the business upon which 
you are going?

Kashyapa said:— 

38. The best of snakes, Takshaka, will 
to-day burn the chastiser of his enemies, king 
Parikshit of the Kuru race.

39. O amiable man, I am going in haste 
without loss of time, to curat that king of 
immeasurable prowess, the sole represen¬ 
tative of the kudu race, when he will be 
bitten by the king of snakes, who is as 
powerful as Agni. 


Takshaka said:— 

40. O Brahmana, F am that very Takshaka, 
who will kill that king of the earth, 
Stop, you cannot cure one who is bitten 
by me. 

Kashyapa said 

41. I am possesssed - with the power of 
learning. Going there, I am sure I shall 
cure the king bitten by you; 


Section 43

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— 

Takshaka said 

1. O Kashyapa, if you are able to cure 
any creature bitten by me, then revive this 
tree bitten by me. 

2. O best of Brahmanas, I bum this 
banian tree ip your sight. Try your best; 
and show me your skill in Mantras of which 
you have just spokep. 

Kashyapa said 

3. O snake, if you are so minded, bite 
(the tree then). I shall revive it, though bitten 
by you. 

Sauti said 

4. The king of the snakes, thus ad¬ 
dressed by the illustrious Kashyapa, bit 
that banian tree. 

5. The tree, bitten by the illustrious snake, 
and having embibed his poison, blazed up 
all around. 

6. Having thus burnt the tree, the snake 
spoke again to Kashyapa, O best of 
Brahmanas, try your best, and let this lord 
of the forest (the banian tree) be revived.” 

7. The tree was reduced to ashes by the 
poison of the king of snakes. But taking 
up the ashes, Kashyapa spoke these words. 

8. “ O king of snakes, behold my power 
of learning in this lord of the forest. O 
snake, 1 shall revive it in your very 
presence." 

9. And then that best of Brahpumas# 
the illustrious and. {earnest Kashyapa, re¬ 
vived by his learning the tree which was 
reduced to a heap of ashes. 

10. He first created the sprout, he then 
created two leaves in it. He then made the 
stem, then the branches, and then the full- 
groWn tree with leaves and all. 

11. Seeing that the tree was really re¬ 
vived by the ukistrious Kashyapa, Takshaka 
said, “ O Brahmana, it is not (at ail) won¬ 
derful. 

12. That you should destroy my poison 
or the poison of others like me. O king of 
Brahmanas, O Rishi, wishing to gain what 
wealth, are you bent on going there ? 

13. I shall give you the wealth you hope 
to get from that best of kings, however difficult 
may it be to get it. 

14. O Brahmana, your success is doubt¬ 
ful, for that king is affected with a Brah- 
vnana’s curse, and the period of his life is 
also shortened. 

15. Your blaring fame, that has over- 
spread.the three worlds, will (then) disappear 
tne sun deprived of his splendour, 

Kashyapa said 

16. I go there for wealth. Give it to me, 
O snake, so that I may go back receiving 
it from you. 

Takshaka said •— 

17. O best of Brahmanas, I shall give 
you wealth more than you hope to get from 
the king. therefore do not go. 

Sauti  said:— 

18. Having heard what Takshaka said, 
the best of Brahmanas, the wise and greatly, 
powerful Kashyapa, sat m meditation. 

19—20. The greatly powerful man 
(Kashyapa), ascertaining by bis ascetic powers 
that the period of the life of the king of the 
Pandava race had really run out, went back, 
after receiving from Takshaka as much 
wealth as he desired to possess. On the great 
Rishi Kashyapas departure, Takshaka 
went with speed towards Hastinapur. 

21. Takshaka heard, on his way, that the 
king of the world was living very carefully, 
protected by poison-neutralising Mantras 
and medicines. 

22. Thereupon the snake reflected, say¬ 
ing. “ The king must be deceived by me 
by my Maya (power of delusion). But what 
must be the means ?” 

23. Takshaka then sent some snakes in 
the guise of Brahmanas. with fruits Kusha 
grass and water as presents. 

Takshaka said:— 

24. Go you aH to (he king, saying that 
you have urgent business, and showing no 
impatience, as if you want to make him a 
present of the fruits, flowers and water. 

Sauti  said 

25. The snakes, thus commanded by 
Takshaka, did (as they were ordered to do } 
They took to the king, Kusha grass, water 
and fruits. 

26. The greatly powerful king of kings 
accepted their presents, and when their 
business was finished, he said, now retire,” 

27. When those disguised snakes had 
gone away, the king addressed his ministers 
and friends, saying. 

28. “Eat with me all these fruits of 
excellent taste, brought by the ascetics.” 

29. Empelled by Fate, and the words of 
the Rishi, tne king with his ministers desired 
to eat those fruits, 

30—31. He himself ate the fnrft within 
which Tashaka lay hidden. O Saunaka, 
when he was eating the fruit, there appeared 
from the fruit an ugly insect, of shape 
scarcely descernable, of black eyes and 
coppery color. The best of kings, taking 
up the insect, said to his councellors, 

32—33. “The sun is setting, I have no 
longer any fear from the poison to-day. 
therefore, let this insect, becoming Tak¬ 
shaka, bite me, so that my sinful act 
be expitiated and the word of the asce¬ 
tic may be true. And those councellors, 
impelled by Fate, approved of the speech of 
the king. 

34. The monarch smiled and placed the 
insect on his head. His hour (of death) 
having come, he lost his senses. , 

35 —36- And when the king iras 
smiling, Takshaka, who had come out of the 
fruit that was offered to the king, coiled 
himself round the neck of the king. Otter¬ 
ing a tremendous roar, the king of the 
snakes immediately bit that protector of the 
world. 

thus ends the forty-third chapter, Asttka, 
in the Adi Parva . 


Section 44

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

i. The ministers, seeing their king in- 
the coils of Takshaka, became pale with
fear, and they wept in great grief. 

2—3. Hearing the roars of Takshaka 
the ministers all fled. And as they were 
running away, they saw the king of the snakes 
the wonderful serpent Takshaka, going away 
through the sky like a streak with the color 
of the lotus. His coursing through the sky ' 
looked like the Vermillion line in the middle 
of the dark masses of a lady's hair. 

4. The palace, in which the king was 
living, biarea up with the poison of the 
snake. The ministers left it and fled in fear.
The king fell down as if struck by 
lightning. 

5. When thus the king fell with the 
poison of Takshaka, the ministers, with the 
royal priest and holy Brahmanas performed 
all his last rites. 

6. All the citizens of the capital met together 
and placed the young son of the 
deceased king on the throne. They called 
that chastiser of foes, the hero of the 
Kuru race, Janamejaya . 

7. That best of kings, Janamejaya, 
though he was but a boy, was very intelligent and wise 
with his ministers and 
priest, the eldest son of Parikshit, the best 
of the Kuru race, ruled his kindom (as 
powerfully and well) as his grandfather 
(Yudhishtir) 

8. Seeing that the young king could now 
keep his enemies in check, his ministers, went 
to Kuvaroavarmana, the king of Kashi, and 
asked him to give his daughter, Vapustama 
in marriage with him. 

9. The King of Kashi, after due enquiries 
bestowed with ordained rights his daughter 
Vapustoma on the mighty nero of the Ruru 
race. And he too was exceedingly happy to 
get her. He did not give his heart to any 
other women at any time. 

10. The greatly powerful hero roamed 
happily in pursuit of pleasures near lakes, in 
woods and in flowery fields. He passed his 
time in pleasure as Pururava of olden time 
did on receiving Urvashi. 

11. When he thus passed his days in 
pursuit of pleasure, ever-renowned for her 
beauty, devoted to her husband, the fairest 
of the fair, Vapushtoma, having gained 
a desirable husband, pleased him with the 
excess of her love. 
thus ends the forty fourth chapter, Astika , in the Adi Parva . 


Section 45

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— 


Sauti  said 

i. About this time, the great ascetic 
Jaratkaru, becoming a Jatra Shayan Ghriha , 
roamed over the world. 

2. The greatly powerful Rishi roamed 
about, bathing in various sacred waters and 
practising various vows, difficult to be prac¬ 
tised by others. 

3. The Rishi lived on air and was com 
pletely free from all worldly desires, thu 
becoming daily lean and emaciated. Thu 
did he see his ancestors, hanging in the hole 
their heads downwards, 

4. By a cord of Virana roots, having 
only one thread entire. Even that one 
thread was gradually being eaten away by 
the rat, living in that hole. 

5. They were in the hole without food ; 
they were emaciated, pitiable and eagerly 
disirous of emancipation. Jaratkaru, in 
humble guise, came near these pitiable ones, 
and asked them, 

6—7. “Who are you that are hanging 
by the cord of Virana roots,—of which the 
single weak root that is still left is gradually 
being eaten away by the rat that lives in 
this hole. 

8 . The little that remains of the single 
thread will soon be cut away. It is quite 
evident that you will then fall into the pit 
with your heads downwards. 

9. I have been moved with pity, seeing 
that you hang with your faces downwards 
and that you are overtaken by a great cala¬ 
mity. What good can I do to you ? 

10. Tell me without delay whether your 
this great calamity can be relieved with a 
fourth, or a third or even a half of my this 
asceticism. 

11. O relieve >ourselves even with the 
whole of my asceticism. 1 consent to it. Do 
as you please. 

The Ancestors said 

12. O Venerable Brahmachari, you 
wish to relieve us. But, O best of the twice - 
born, you cannot relieve us with your asce¬ 
ticism. 

13. O child, O best of speakers, we have 
also the fruits of our asceticism, but O 
Brahmana, we are falling down into this 
hell for the want of offspring. 

14. The Grandsire has said, ‘the offspring 
is the great Dharma.' O child, hanging as 
we are in this hole, our intellect has grown 
dim. 

15. therefore we cannot know you, al¬ 
though you are known for your greatness all 
over the world. You are venerable, you 
are of good fortune, you sorrowfully grieve 
for us. 


16. Hear, O Brahmana, who we are, and 
for whom you are lamenting. We are Rishis 
of the name of Yayavara of rigid vows. 

17. O Rishi, we have fallen from a holy 
region for want of offspring. Our great 
penances have not been destroyed, therefore, 
we have still one cord left (to hang from.) 

18-19. We have only one thread (son) 
now, but it matters little whether he is or he 
is not. Unfortunate we are 1 We have a 
thread in one, known as Jaratkaru, well-read 

in the Vedas and Vedangas, who has adopt¬ 
ed asceticism. He is high-souled, he has 
his senses under complete control, he is a 
man of rigid vows, a great ascetic. 

20. But from his temptation for the merits 
of asceticism we have been reduced to this 
state. He has no wife and no son, no friend, 
no relatives. 

21. This is the reason why we hang in 
this hole, our consciousness gone, like one 
having no one to look after. If you meet 
him, tell him out of kindness for us. 

22. “Your ancestors are hanging in grief 
with their faces downwards. O holy man, 
take a wife and beget offspring. 

23. O Rishi, O holy man, you are the 
only thread in the line of your ancestors.” O 
Brahmana, the Virana root that you see 
and on which we hang, 

24-25. Is the cord representing our race. 
O Brahmana, these threads of the Virana 
roots which yee see eaten up (by the rat) are 
we ourselves, who have been eaten up by 
Time. This root which you see half eaten, 

26. And by which we are hanging in 
this hole is he who has adopted asceticism. 
The rat which you see is Time of infinite 
strength. 

27. He (Time) is slowly killing the 
wretch Jaratkaru, engaged in asceticism, 
having been tempted by its merits but 
wanting in prudence and heart. 

28. O excellent one, his asceticism can¬ 
not save us. The roots being torn, falling 
off from heavens, deprived of consciousness 
’by Time. 

29. Behold like sinful wretches we are 
going downwards. On our going with all 
our relatives down into this hole, 

30. Eaten up by Time, he too will sink 
with us into hell. Whether it is asceticism, 
or sacrifice, or other holy acts, 

31. O child, they are inferior and can¬ 
not be equal to a son. O child, seeing all 
this, tell every thing to the Rishi Jaratkaru. 

32. O Brahmana, becoming our saviour, 
you should, out of kindness towards us, tell 
him in detail all that you have seen { so that 
it might induce him to take a wife and 
beget offspring. 

33. O excellent man, who are you ? You 
may be one of his friends, for you grieve 
for us like a friend and as one belonging to 
our race. We wish to hear who you are 
that stand before us. 

thus ends {he forty fifth Section 
Astika , in the Adi Partus, 


Section 46

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. Having heard all this, Jaratkaru 
became exceedingly sorry. He spoke to the 
pitris in sorrow and his words were choked 
by tears. 

Jaratkaru said 

2, You are my fathers and grandfathers 
who are gone before. Tell me, therefore, 
what I can do for your welfare. 

3, I am that Jaratkaru,' your sinful son. 
I am a worthless man, a man of sinful deeds. 
Pray, punish me. 

The Ancestors said 

4. O son, you have come by good luck 
at this spot in your travel. O Brahamana, 
why have you not taken a wife ? 

Jaratkaru said 

5. O Pitris, I have this desire always in 
my heart, that having kept my sexual 
passion under complete control, I shall take 
this body to the other world. 

6. My mind is possessed with the idea 
that I must not take a wife. But having 
seen you, my sires, hanging like birds, 

7. O grandfathers, my mind has been 
diverted from Brahmacharja. I shall cer¬ 
tainly do your favourite work. 

8—9. (I shall certainly many), if I get a 
bride of my own name, who will bestow her¬ 
self on me of her own accord, who will come 
to me as a gift, and whom I shall not have 
to maintain. 

10. Otherwise I shall not marry. O 
grandsires, I speak to you the truth. The 
offspring that will be begotten on her shall be 
the means of your salvation, and O my 
fathers, you will then live for ever in blessed 
happiness and without the apprehension of 
a fall. 

Sauti said 

11. The Rishi (Jaratakaru), having said 
all this to the ancestors, (left the plnce and) 
roamed over the world again. O Saunaka, 
although he grew old, he did not get a wife. 

12. He was very sorry that he was not 
successful, but directed by his ancestors he 
continued the search. He went into the 
forest and wept aloud in grief. 

13. Having gone into the forest, the wise 
Rishi, moved by the desire of doing good to 
his ancestors, said, 11 I shall ask for a bride, 
distinctly uttering the words thrice. 

14. Whatever creatures are, mobile or 
immobile, visible or invisible, O you all, hear 
my words. 

15. I am a man, engaged in severe 
penances, but my ancestors, afflicted wkh grief, 
have told me, 0 Get yourself married to 
beget a son." 

16. Directed by my ancestors, I am 
roaming in poverty and sorrow all over the world 
for wedding a maiden whom I shall get as a 

17. Let any of those creatures, whom I 
(now) address, if he has a daughter, bestow 
her on me who atrt roving ail over the world 
for a bride. 

18. A bride, who bears the same name 
with me, who will be given to me as a gift, 
and whom I shall not have to maintain,— 
(If there is such a bride), O bestow heron 
me. 

19. Thereupon those snakes, who had 
been appointed to watch Jaratkaru, knowing 
his intention, gave information to Vasuki. 

20. The king of the snakes immediately 
went to the place where the Rishi was, taking 
with him his sister, decked with various 
ornaments. 

21. O Brahmana, the king of the Snakes 
Vasuki, having gone there, offered the 
maiden as a gift to that high-soqled Rishi. 
But he did not at once accept her. 

22. The Rishi, thinking her not to be of 
the same name with himself, and seeing 
also that the question of her maintenance 
was not settled, reflected for a while and 
hesitated to accept her. 

23. O descendant of Brigu, he then asked 
Vasuki fhe name of the maiden, and he told 
him also, I shall not maintain her." 

thus ends the forty sixth Section , 
Astika, in the Adi Parva • 


Section 47

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

8<mti said:— 

1. Thereupon Vasuki said to the Rishi 
Jaratkaru, “ This maiden has the same name 
as yours. She is my sister and is an ascetic. 

2. I shall support her , O best of Brahmanas 
and therefore accept her. O Rishi, I 
shall protect her with all my abilities. 
O best of Rishis, she has been brought up 
by me for you." 

The Rishi said 

3. It is settled between us that I shall not 
maintain this maiden and she will not do 
anything that would be displeasing to me, 
If she does, I shall leave her. 

Sauti said 

4. When a promise was given by the 
snake that he would maintain his sister, 
Jaratkaru went to the house of the snake. 

5  Thereupon the virtuous and vetern 
Rishi, learned in Mantras and observant of 
rigid vows, accepted her hands, given to him 
in due rites. 

6 . He then being much adored by the 
Rishis lived with his wife in the beautiful 
house set apart for him by the kin of the 
snakes.

7. In that house was a bedsted covered 
with valuable coverlets. Jaratkaru slept 
(in that bedsted) with his wife. 

8. The excellent man (Jaratkaru) made 
an agreement with his wife, saying “ You 
should not do any thing or say any thin 
that will be displeasing to me." 

9. I shall then leave you and no longer live 
in the house, if you do any such thing. Bear 
in mind these words that I have spoken. 

10. The sister of the snake, in great 
anxiety and sorrow said, Be it so.’ 

11. The illustrious girl, mqved by the 
desire of doing good to hpr relatives, 
served her husband of hard life with the 
means of Sweta Kakiya, (i.e with the wake- 
fulness of the dog, the timidity of the dear 
and the sharp instinct of crows to understand 
signs.) 

12. One day the sister of Vasuki, when 
her season of impurity came, bathed according 
to custom, and went to the great Rishi, 
her husband. 


13.Thereupon she became quick with 
child, and the embryo was like fire. It was 
greatly effulgent and was as resplendent as 
the god of fire himself. 

14. It began to grow like the moon of 
the white fort-night. A few day, after, the 
greatly famous Jaratkaru, 

15- Placing his head on the tap of his 
wife, slept, looking like one fatigued. When 
the Brahmana was thus sleeping, the sun 
entered the summit of the western mountain. 

16. O Brahmana, as the day was fading 
away, fearing the loss of (Jaratkaru’s virtue, 
the excellent sister of, Vasuki grew very anxious. 
 
17. (She, thought) "What shall I do 
now ? Shall I wake my husband or shall 
I not ? He leads a hard life, and he is virtuous.
How can I act so that I may not offend him?

18. On the one hand is his anger, and 
the other is his loss of virtue. The loss of
virtue is the greater evil of the two; this 
is my belief. 

19. But if I wake him, he will surely 
be angry. If the time for prayer passes 
away (without his doing it,) he will certainly 
sustain the loss of virtue. 

20—21. Having thus thought over the 
matter, the sweet-voiced snake Jaratkaru, 
thus spoke to the Rishi, resplendent with 
asceticism and lying like a mass of flame, 
44 O great Lord, anse, the sun is setting.” 

22. O Illustrious man, O Rishi of rigid 
vows, perform your Sandha (prayer) after 
touching water. The tfcne for Agnihotra 
has come. These moments are beautiful, 
and fearful also. 

23. O Lord, the evening is now gently 
covering the western sky. Having been 
thus addressed, the illustrious great ascetic 
Jaratkaru, 

24. His lips quivering in anger, spoke 
these words to his wife, “O snake, you 
have insulted me. 

25—26. I shall no longer live with you. 
I shall go away whence I came. O lady 
of the snake-race, I know it for certain, 
the Sun has no power to set (at the usual 
time) if I remain asleep. A man cannot 
remain in the place where he is insulted, 

27. Far less can remain a man like me, 
who am religious and those who are like me. 
Being thus addressed by her husband, the 
heart of the sister of Vasuki began to trem¬ 
ble (in fear). 

28. She spoke to him, 44 O Brahmana, 
I have not woken you from any desire of 
insult. 

29—30- 1 have done it lest' your virtue 
suffer any loss.” thus being addressed by 
his wife, the great Rishi Jaratkaru,—posses¬ 
sed with anger and desirous of forsaking 
his wife, said to the snake, O lady of the 
Naga race, I have never spoken a false¬ 
hood, therefore I shall go. 

31. This was my agreement made with 
u and your brother. O amiable lady, I 
ve passed happily with you. O fair lady, 
tell your brother, 

32. When I am gone, that I have left 
you. On my going away, you should not 
grieve for me. ” 

33—35. Having been thus addressed, 
the beautiful Jaratkaru, was filled with 
anxiety and sorrow. Her eyes were full of 
tears, her face was colourless with fear and 
her voice choked with sobs. She mustered 
courage, but her voice was trembling. She 
joined her hands and thus addressed the 
Rishi Jaratkaru, “O virtuous man, it is 
not proper for you to leave me. 

36. You are always in virtue,, so am 
I,—I am always engaged in doing good. 
O best of Brahmanas, the object for which 
I was bestowed on you,  

37—38. Has not been as vet accom¬ 
plished. Unfortunate am I ! What shall I 
speak to Vasuki ? O excellent Rishi, the 
son, desired by my relatives afflicted by their 
mother's curse, to be begotten by you on me, 
is not as yet born. The welfare of my rela¬ 
tives depends on the son begotten by you. 

39. Moved by the desire of doing good 
to my race, so that my connection with 
you be fruitful, O Brahmana, I entreat you 
not to go away. 

40. O excellent one, high-sooled as you are» 
why should you leave me who have commit¬ 
ted no fault. My conception is not yet 
apparent,” 

41. thus addressed, the great ascetic 
Rishi spoke to his wife Jaratkaru, these 
words, proper and suitable to the occasion. 

42. O fortunate lady, the being that is 
now in your womb, is like the god of fire 
himself. He is a Rishi, greatly virtuous and 
a master of the Veda and the Vedangas.” 

43. Having said this, the virtuous and great 
Rishi Jaratkaru went away, hishedrl firmly 
fixed on practising severest asceticism again. 

thus ends the forty seventh Section 
Astika , in the Adi Parba . 


Section 48

(ASTIKA PARVA .Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. O ascetic Rishi, as soon as her husband 
was gone, Jaratkaru went to her brother
and told him all that had hap¬ 
pened. 

2. Hearing this greatly evil news, the 
king of the snakes spoke to his miserable 
sister, he being more miserable than she 
was. 

Vasuki said -

3. O amiable sister, you know the object 
for which you were bestowed (on the Rishi;) 
If a son be born for the good of the snake 
race, 

4. That greatly powerful being Will be 
able to save us from the Snake-sacrifice. 
The Grandsire told this to the celestials in 
olden times. 

5. O Fortunate one, are you quick with 
child by that best of Rishis? My heart’s 
desire is that my bestowal of you on that 
wise man may not be fruitless. 

6. It is not proper for me to ask you 
such a question, but I ask you from the 
gravity of the matter. 

7. Knowing that it is not possible to get 
back your husband, ever engaged in severe 
•asceticism, I shall not follow nim ; he may 
curse me. 

8. O amiable sister, tell me all that 
your husband has done, and thereby (relieve 
me by drawing out the terribly painful 
dart that is implanted in my heart. 

9. Jaratkaru, having been thus addressed 
consoled the king of the snakes, Vasuki 
and spoke thus. 

Jaratkaru said 

10. Asked by me about offspring, the 
high-souled great ascetic said, “It is there," 
and went away. 

11. I do not remember him to have 
spoken a falsehood even in jest. O king, 
wny should he then speak a falsehood in 
such a serious matters. He said, 

12. “O Lady of the Naga race, do not 
grieve for the result of our union. A son 
will be born in you like a blazing fire. 

13. O Brother, having said this, the 
Kishi, my husband, went away ; therefore, 
let the great grief in your mind be removed

Sauti said 

14. Having heard this, Vasuki, the king 
of the snakes, accepted the words of 
his sister, saying “Be itso.“ 

15 O Brahmana, the best of the snakes 
then adored his sister with best regards, with 
fitting eulogies and gifts of wealth. 

16. O Best of the twice born, the great and
powerful and effulgent embryo began to 
evelope like the moon in the white 
fortnight. 

I7. O Brahmana, the sister of the 
snake in due time gave birth to a son with 
the splendeur of a celestial boy, the destroy¬ 
ers of the fears of (the relatives of) his father 
and mother. 

18 . He grew up in the house of the king 
of the snakes. He studied the Vedas with 
their Angas from the great Rishi Chyavana, 
the son of Brigu. 

19. though he was a mere boy, his 
asceticism was great; he was gifted with 
great intelligence and many virtues. He 
was known in the world by the name of 
Astika. 

20. He was known by the name of 
Astika, because his father had gone away 
to the forest, saying Astika (one is tber«Q, 
when he was in his mother's womb. 

21. though he was only a boy, yet he 
was grave and intelligent. He was kept 
with great care in the palace of the snake - 
king. 

22. He was like the illustrious lord of the 
celestials, Shulapani (Shiva). He grew up 
day by day to the infinite delight of all 
the snakes. 

thus ends the forty eighth Section , 
Astika , in the Adi Para. 


Section 49
(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauuaka said 

1. Tell me again in detail all that king 
Janamejaya asked his ministers to say 
about his father's asccntion to heaven. 

Sauti said 

2. O Brahmana, hear all that the king 
asked his ministers and all that they said 
about the death of Parikshit. 

Janamejaya said 

3. You know all that happened to my 
father, and how my illustrious father met 
with his death. 

4. Hearing from you all about my 
father, I shall do what is proper and good. 
I shall not do otherwise. 

Sauti said 

5. Being asked by that high-souled king 
Janamejaya, the virtuous and wise ministers 
thus replied. 

The Ministers said 

6. Hear, O King, What you have asked. 
Hear an account of that king of the world, 
your illustrious father's life, and how he left 
this world. 

7. Your father was virtuous, and noble, 
and a protector of his subjects. Hear, how 
that high-souled king conducted himself on 
earth. 

8. That virtuous king, virtuously inclined, 
protected, like Virtue and Justice themselves, 
the four castes, keeping them in the duties 
of their respective orders. 

9. Blessed with fortune and with match¬ 
less prowess, he protected the goddess earth. 
He hated none and had none to hate him. 

10. Like Prajapati he looked at all crea¬ 
tures with equal eyes. The Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, 

11. Engaged in their respective duties, 
O king, were all impartially protected by 
him. He maintained widows, orphans, the 
maimed and the poor. 

12. He was handsome, and was like a 
second Soma to all creatures. All were 
contended and blessed with good fortune 
by that truthful and greatly powerful king. 

13. He was the disciple of Saradatwa 
in the science of arms. O Janameiaya, your 
father was the beloved of Govinda (Krishna). 

14. He was the favourite of all men and 
was greatly renowned. He was born in the 
womb of Uttara when the Kuru race was 
almost destroyed. 

15. therefore the mighty son of Abhi- 
manyu was called Parikshit. He was 
learned in the treatise on the duties of kings, 
and was adorned with all the noble qualities. 

16. He had his passions under control, 
he was intelligent, he was gifted with great 
memory, he was practiser of all virtues, a 
conquerer of six passions, a greatly intelli¬ 
gent man, fully acquainted with the science 
of ethics. 

17:—18. Your father ruled over his sub¬ 
jects for sixty years. When he died, all the 
people were extremely sorry. After him, 
O best of men, you have acquired this 
hereditary kingdom of the Kurus, (who have 
been ruling over it) for the last thousand 
years. O protecter of every creature, you 
were installed when you were a child. 

Janamejaya said 

19. None was born in our dynasty who 
did not look after the good of his subjects and 
who was not beloved by them. See special¬ 
ly the conduct of my grandfathers (five 
Pandava brothers) who were ever engaged 
in great deeds. 

20. How did my such a noble father 
meet with his death ? Describe it to me. 
I am desirous of hearing it. 

Sauti said 

21 thus asked by the king, the ministers 
the well-wishers of the Icing, told him 
everything as it had happened. 

The Ministers said 

22—23. O king, that monarch, the lord 
of the world, greatly obedient to all Sas - 
tras like the first of all beings, became adic- 
ted to sports like the best of bow-men, the 
great warrior and exceedingly powerful 
Pandu. He made over to us all state 
affairs. 

4. Once on a time he went into the 
forest and pierced a deer with an arrow. 
Having thus wounded the deer, he followed 
it armed with sword and quiver, 


25. Alone on foot. But he could not, 
however, come upon that lost deer. 

26. He, being sixty years old, and there¬ 
fore fatigued and hungry, saw a great Rishi 
in that great forest. 

27. The King accosted that Rishi, who 
was then observing the vow of silence, but 
the Rishi did not make any reply. 

28. The fatigued and the hungry king 
grew angry with the Rishi who sat motion¬ 
less as a piece of wood in observance of his 
vow of silence. 

29. Knowing not that the Rishi was ob¬ 
serving a vow of silence, your father, being 
angry, insulted him. 

30. O excellent one of the Bharata race, 
he took up from the ground a dead snake 
with the end of his bow and placed it on 
the shoulder of that holy Rishi. 

31. But that wiseman did not speak a 
word, good or bad, and he did not become 
angry. He remained as he was, bearing 
the snake on his shoulder. 

thus ends the forty ninth chapter, Astika , 
in the Adi Parva, 


Section 50. 

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

The Ministers said 

1. O king of kings, that tired and hungry 
monarch, having placed the snake on the 
shoulder of the Rishi, came back to his owh 
capital. 

2. The Rishi had a son, born of a cow, 
named Sringi. He was greatly renowned, 
exceedingly powerful, anagreatly energetic 
and very wrathful. 

3. He used to go to Brahma ard 
worshipped him. Commanded by him, Sringi 
was one day returning home, 

4—5. When he heard from his friend 
how his father had been insulted by your 
father. He heard that he was bearing on his 
shoulder a dead snake as motionless as a 
piece of wood, without doing any injury to 
the man who had insulted him thus. 

6. O king, (he heard that your father had 
insulted the Rishi) who was a great ascetic, 
the best of Rishis, a controller of his 
passions, a pious and holy man, a door of 
wonderful deeds, his soul enlightened with 
asceticism, and his senses and their functions 
under his complete control. 

7. His practices were pious, his speeches 
pure. He was contented and had no 
avarice; he had not the least meanness. 
nor had he any avarice. He was old, and 
observant of the vow of silence. 

8. And he was the refuge of all creatures. 
Such was the Rishi whom your father 
insulted. The son of that Rishi, however, 
cursed your father in anger. 

9. Though that son of the Rishi was but 
a boy, he had the splendeur of mature 
age. He speedily touched water and spoke 
thus in anger, 

10—12. With reference to your father, 
burning as if in effulgence,—“ Behold my 
ascetic powers. The angry and effulgent 
snake Takshaka, as spoken by me, will bum 
with his poison, within seven nights hence, 
the wretch who has placed a dead snake 
on the shoulder of my sire.” Having said 
this, he went to the place where his father 
was. 

13. Seeing his father, he told him of the 
curse uttered by him. That best of Rishis 
sent to your lather, 

14. A well-mannered and virtuous 
desdple, named Gaurmukha. After having 
taken rest for a while, he (Gaurmukha) told 
every thing to the king (your father,) 

15. (Saying in the words of his pre¬ 
ceptor) “ O king, you have been cursed by 
my son. Takshaka will burn you with his 
poison. O great king, be careful. 

16. O Janamejaya, your father, having 
heard these terrible|words, took every precau¬ 
tion against the powerful snake Taksnaka. 

17. When the seventh day arrived, 
a Brahmana Rishi, named Kashyapa, wished 
to come to the king. 

18. The king of the snakes, Takshaka, 
saw Kashyapa, and that king of the snakes 
asked that Brahmana, “ Where are you 
going in a hurry ? And what is your busi¬ 
ness for which you go ?” 

Kashyapa said =— 

19. O Brahmana, I am going where (he 
best of the Kurus, the king named Parik- 
shit is. He will to-day be killed by the 
snake Takshaka. 

20. I am going in a hurry to cure him, 
so that he, being treated by me, may not 
be killed by the snake. 

Takshaka said:— 

21-22 O Brahmana, I am that very 
Takshaka. Why do you wish to revive the 
king bitten by me. Behold my wonderful 
power. You are incapable of reviving the 
king bitten by me. Having said this, 
Takshaka there and thfen bit a lord of the 
forest (a banian tree). 


23. The tree was reduced to ashes as 
soon as bitten by the snake ; but, O king, 
Kashyapa, however, revived it. 

24. Thereupon Takshaka, in order to 
tempt him, said, “Tell me what is your 
desire.” and Kashyapa replied to Takshaka, 

25. “Iam going there with the desire of 
(getting) wealth.” The illustrious Takshaka, 
(thereupon) told him in sweet words, 

26. “ O sinless one, take from me more 
wealth than you expect to get from that 
king. And then go back.” 

27. The best of men, Kashyapa, being 
thus addressed by the snake, and having 
received from him as much wealth as he 
desired to get, went back. 

28—29. When the Brahman went back, 
Takshaka went in disguise to that best of 
kings, your virtuous father, who was then 
staying with all precautions in bis palace ; 
and he burnt him with the fire of his poison. 
After this (most lamantable event,) you, O 
best of kings, were installed on the thrdne. 

30. O best of kings, we have told you 
all that we saw and heard, though the ac¬ 
count is terrible and cruel. 

31. O best of kings, you have now heard 
how (your father) the great king of the 
world was killed, and how Rishi Uttanka 
was insulted, do what is proper. 

Sauti said-

32. Thereupon the chastiser of foes, 
Janamejaya addressed all his ministers 
thus. 

Janamejaya said 

33—34. From whom have you heard this 
wonderful account of the lord of the forest, 
burnt to ashes by Takshaka, and revived 
again by Kashyapa ? My father could not 
have certainly died were the poison neutra¬ 
lised by the Mantras of Kashyapa. 

35. The sinful wretch, .the worst of the 
snakes (Takshaka), thought in his mind,— 
If the Brahmana revives tne king bitten by 
me, 

36. “All the world will laugh at me saying, 
Takshaka had no poison any longer.” Certainly 
having thought so, he gratified the 
Brahmana. 

37—38. I have, however, devised a means 
by which I shall punish him. I now wish to 
hear how you heard and how you saw what 
happaned in the solitude of the forest,
especially the conversation between Takshaka 
and Kashyapa, Having heard this, I shall 
devise means for the destruction of the 
snakes. 

The Ministers said=— 

39. O king, hear from whom we heard 
the conversation between that king of the 
Brahmanas and the king of the snakes. 

40. O king, a certain man had climbed 
that lord of the forest to collect its dry 
twigs for sacrificial fuel. 

41. He was not seen by the Brahmana 
or the snake. O king, he too was reduced 
to ashes with the tree. 

42. O king of kings, he was revived with 
the tree by the power of the Brahmana. 
That man, a servant of a Brahmana, came 
to us, 

43. And told us in detail what happened 
between Takshaka and the Brahmana. O 
king, we are thus able to tell you what we 
saw or heard. O best of kings, having 
heard it, do what should be done now. 

Sauti said 

44. Having heafd the words of the minis¬ 
ters, the king Janamejaya began to weep in 
grief and squeezed his hands. 

45. The lotus-eyed king breathed 
long and hot breaths , the king shed tesfrs 
and wept aloud. 

46. The king, afflicted with grief and 
sorrow, shed tears, and touching water 
according to the form, thought for a while 
as if sifting something in his mind. Then 
addressing all his ministers, he said :— 

Janamejaya said 

47. I have heard your account of my 
father's ascension to heaven. 

48—49. Know now what is my fixed 
resolve. No time should be lost to avenge 
the wretch Takshaka who killed my father. 
The wretch killed the king, making Sringi 
a mere pretext. 

50. Out of malignity alone he prevented 
Kashyapa from coming. If that Brahmana 
had come, my father would have certainly 
lived. 

51. What harm could have possibly come 
to him if the king had revived by the grace 
of Kashyapa and the precautions taken by 
the ministers ? 

52. He, being ignorant of my anger, pre¬ 
vented that best of Brahmanas, Kashyapa, 
from coming to my unconquerable father. 

53. The aggression of the wretch Takshaka 
is great, for ne gave wealth to the Brahmana, 
so that he might not revive the king. 

54. I must avenge myself on my father's 
enemy, to please myself, to please Uttanka 
and you alL 

thus ends the fiftieth Section , Astika , in 
the Adi Parva


Section 51

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued % 

Sauti said 

1. The illustrious king having said so, 
the ministers expressed their approbation. 
The king expressed his determination of 
performing a Snake-sacrifice. 

2. The Lord of the earth, the best of the 
Kurus, king (Janamejaya) the son of Pari- 
kshit, then called his priest Pitwijas. 

3. And that accomplished.speaker spoke 
on the accomplishment of his great task. 
(He said), “ I must avenge on that wretch 
Takshaka. 

4—5. Tell me what I must do. Do you 
know any act by which I can throw 
Takshaka with all his friends and relatives 
in the blazing fire ? I want to burn that 
wretch of a snake as he burnt my father 
with his poison. 

The Bitwijas said 

6. O king, there is a sacrifice devised 
by the celestials for you. It is known as the 
Snake-sacrifice, and is spoken of in the 
Puranas. 

7. O king, you alone can accomplish it, 
and no one else. The men, learned in the 
Puranas, have told us that there is such a 
sacrifice. 

Sauti said 

8. O excellent one, thus addressed, that 

royal sage thought Takshafka already 
thrown into the blazing fire and burnt to 
ashes. 1 

9. The king then told these Brahmanas, 

learned in Mantra 4  I shall perforin that 
sacrifice. Tell me the things that) are 
necessary. 

10. O best of Brahmanas, thereupon lift 
trise Ritwijas, learned in the Sastras
measured, according to the ordinances, a 
piece of land for the sacrificial platform. 

11—13. It was graced by the presence 
of holy Brahmanas; it was decked with 
much valuable wealth ; it was full of ue&lth 
and paddy. On this sacrificial platform 
they according to rites installed the King in 
the Snake-sacrifice. But before the com- 
mencement of the sacrifice happened 

14— 15  An incident which foreboded a 
hinderance to it. For when the sacrificial 
platform was being built, a man, Suia by 
caste, well acquainted with the Puranas and 
learned in ttne art of masonry and of 
laying foundations, said. - 

16. The land in which the platform was 
made and the time when it was measured 
Indicate that this sacrifice will not be com¬ 
pleted. A Brahmana will be its cause.' 

17. Having heard this, the king, before 
he was installed in the sacrifice, ordered the 
gate keepers, saying, " None must be allow¬ 
ed to enter here without my permission." 

thus ends the fifty first Section , Astika , 
in the Adi Parva . 

***

Section 52


(ASTIKA PARVA).-C<mtf««f. 

Sauti said:— 

I—2. The Snake-sacrifice then began 
In due form. The sacrificial priests, ex¬ 
pert in their respective duties according 
to the ordinance, their bodies with black 
garments, and their eyes red from the 
smoke, poured ghee in the blazing fire,utter¬ 
ing the Mantras . 

3. Making the hearts of all the snakes 
tremble in fear, they began to pour ghee 
In the mouth of the Agni, uttering the 
names of the snakes. 

4. Thereupon the snakes fell into the 
blazing fire one after another, each be¬ 
numbed and dying piteously to one another. 

5 Breathing hard, swelling to enormous 
sizes, 4 intwining one another with their 
heads and tails, they came in large numbers, 
and fell into the blazing fire. 

6.—7. The white, the black, the blue, 
the old and the young, those measuring a 
crosm those measuring a yoyana, and those 
measuring a gokarna , all fell violently into 
that blazing fire uttering various cries. 

8. Hundreds and thousands, tens of 
thousands and hundreds of thousands came 
benumbed and perished on that oc- 


9. Amongst those that perished, 
there were some that were like the horse, 
some like the trunks of elephants, and 
others with the huge bodies and strength 
of mad elephants. 


10. The snakes of various colours, and 
of virulent poison, of terrible look, like 
maces furnished with iron spikes, of enor¬ 
mous strength and of the greatest biting 
propensity, tell into the fire as the result 
of their mother's curse. 


thus ends the fifty-second Section , 
Astiha, in the Adi Parva « 


Section 53

(ASTIKA PARVA .)—Continued. 

Sa anakfc said ; — 

1. Who were the great Rishb that be¬ 
came the Ritmiias in the Snake-sacrifice of 
the wise king Janamejaya of the Pandava 
dynasty ? 

2. Who became the Sadashyas in that 
terrible Snake-sacrifice, so fearful to the 
snakes and so sorrowful to them 7 

3. O child, you should describe all this 
in detail, so that, O Sauti, we may know 
who were acquainted with the rituals of the 
Snake-sacrifioe. 

Sauti said:— 

4. I shall tell you the names of those 
wise men who became the Ritvnjas and 
Sadashyas of the king. 

5. The Brahmana, named Chandra 
Garva, born in the race of Chyavana, greatly 
illustrious and the foremost man amongst 
all the learned in the Vedas, became the 
Hota in that sacrifice. 

6. The learned old Brahmana, Kautsa 
became the Udgata , J aim ini became the 
Brahman , Sranagarava and Pingala became 
the Adhvaryusm 

7—9. Vyasa with his son and disciple, 
Uddalaka, Pramataka, Swetaketu, Pingala 
Asita, Devala, Narada, Parvata, Atnya, 
Kundajathara, Kalaghata, Vatsya, dd 
Srutasrava, ever engaged in Japa and the 
study of the Vedas, Kohala, Devasannana, 
Maudgalya, Samasaurava. 

10. These and many others, who were 
vastly learned in the Vedas, became the 
Sadashyas in the sacrifice of the son of 
Parikshit. 

11« When the Ritwijas began to pour 
ghee on the fire in that Snake-sacrifice, 
Tearful snakes, striking fear into every, 
creature, began to fall into its fire. 

12. The fat and the marrow of the 
snakes, thus burnt in the sacrificial fire, 
flowed like rivers, and the whole atmosphere 
was filled with an insufferable stench, owing 
to this continual burning of the snakes. 

13. Incessant were the piteous cries of 
the snakes that fell into the fire, and of those 
that were in the air about to fall into it. 

14. Io the meanwhile, as soon as Tak- 
shaka heard that Janamejaya had been 
installed in the sacrifice, he, the king of 
snakes? went to Indra. 

15. That best of snakes told every thing 
to Indra and having acknowledged his fault, 
asked his protection in fear. 



ADI PARVA. 


73 


|6. Inctra, being much pleased, told him, 

' O Takdi ika, O king of the snakes, you 
have nothing to fear here from the 
snakc-sacrificc. 

17. The Grandfather was pacified by | 
me for your sake. therefore, you have no 
fear. Drive away this fever of fear from 
your mind." 

18. thus being encouraged by him, 
the best of snakes, Takshaka, lived in Indra’s 
abode in joy and happiness. 

19-—20. Here did Vasuki become ex¬ 
ceedingly sorry, seeing that the snakes were 
continually falling into the fire and that 
his race had been reduced to only a few. 
That best of the snakes were confounded 
with grief and thus spoke to his sister, 

21.  O amiable sister, my body is burn¬ 
ing. I can no longer see the points of the 
heavens. I am about to fall owing to the loss 
of consciousness. My mind is whirling. 

22. My sight is failing, my heart is trem¬ 
bling. Being benumbed, I may fall into the 
blazing fire (of the sacrifice) to-day. 

23. This sacrifice of the son of Parikshit 
is begun for the extermination of our race. 

It is evident I also shall have (soon) to go 
to the land of the dead. 

24. That time has come, O sister, for 
which I bestowed you on the Rishi Jarat- 
karu ; O sister, protect us with all our race. 

25. O best of the women of the snake 
race, Astika will put an end to this sacrifice 
which is being performed. The Grandsire 
himself told me this in time gone by. 

26. therefore, O sister, ask your dear 
son, who is exceedingly learned in the 
Vedas and respected even by the old, to 
protect me and those dependent cm me. 

thus ends the fifty third Section , Astika , 
in the Adi Parva. 


Section 54

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. The snake-lady, Jaratkaru, then 
calling her son, told him what was spoken to 
her by Vasuki, the king of the Nagas, 

2. (She said) “O son, the time has come 
for the accomplishment of that object for 
which ! was bestowed by my brother on 
your father. therefore, do what is need¬ 
ful." 

Artika said 

3. For what object, O mother, were you 


bestowed by my uncle on my father ? Tell 
me all, so that I may do what is proper, 

Sauti said 

4. Jaratkaru, the sister of the snake- 
king, ever desirous to do good to her race 
and much moved by the general distress 
said, 

Jaratkaru said 

5. O son, the mother of all the snakes 
was Kadru. Hear, why she cursed her 
sons in anger. 

6—7. Addressing her sons she said, “ As 
you have refused to change the color of 
Uchaisrava, the king of horses, thus making 
me a slave to Vmata according to the 
wager, the god of fire will consume you 
all in the sacrifice of Janamejaya. thus 
being killed, you will go to the land of the 
dead. 

8. The Grandsire of all creatures ap¬ 
proved her curse, and when she was uttering 
it, he said, “ Be it so." 

9. O child, Vasuki, having heard this 
curse and the words of the Grandsire, sought 
the protection of the celestials after the 
completion of the churning of the ocean. 

10. The celestials, having their object 
gained, for they had obtained the excellent 
Ambrosia, came to the Grandsire, placing 
their brother (Vasuki) at the head. 

it. All the celestials, with the snake- 
king Vasuki, tried to induce the great Diety, 
born of the lotus to grace in a way so that 
the curse might be made futile. 

The Celestials said 

12. O lord, the king of the snakes; 
Vasuki, is sorry for bis Relatives. How may 
his mother’s curse be made futile ? 

Brahma said 

13. Jaratkaru will marry a wife named, 
Jaratkaru. That Brahmana, who will be 
born of her, will save the snakes. 

Jaratkarn said 

14. The best of snakes, Vasuki, having 
heard this, O illustrious son, bestowed me on 
your noble father, long before the com¬ 
mencement of this sacrifice. 

15. As the result of that marriage, you 
were born of me. That time has now come. 
You should now protect us from this danger. 

16. You should protect my brother and 
myself from the fire, so that the object (our 
protection) for which I was bestowed on your 
wise father, may not remain unfulfilled. O 
my son, what do you think (proper now) ? 



74 


mahabharata. 


Sauti said 

17. thus addressed, Astika said to his 
mother, “Yes, I will (save the snakes).” He 
then addressed Vasuki, thereby infusing life 
unto him, and said, 

18. ” O Vasuki, the best of snakes, 
1 shall protect you. I tell you truly that I 
shall relieve you from the curse. 

iq. O snake, be at your ease. There is 
no longer any fear. 1 shall try my utmost to 
do you good. 

20— 21. None can say that my words 
even in jest have ever been false,—not to 
speak of my words on serious occasions. O 
uncle, going to that best of kings, Janamc- 
jaya, now installed in the sacrifice, I shall 
please him with words mixed with blessings, 
so that, O excellent one, that king will re¬ 
frain from the sacrifice. 

22. O king of the snakes, O high-minded 
one, believe all I say. Believe me, my 
resolve can never remain unfulfilled. 

Vasuki said 

23. O Astika, being afflicted with my 
mother’s curse my head is whirling, 
thy heart is breaking. I cannot see the 

n t>1A heavens. 

Astika said 

24. O best of snakes, you should not 
grieve any Unger. 1 shall dispell your 
fear of the blazing fire. 

25. I shall extinguish this (fire), this 
terrible punishment,—blazing as the fire of 
the end of the Yuga . You should not en¬ 
tertain any fear any longer. 

Sauti saids— 

26—27. In order to save the king of the 
snakes, the best of Brahmanas, Astika, dis¬ 
pelling the terrible fever of Vasuki’s heart, 
and taking it as it were upon himself, went 
with speed to the sacrifice of Janamejaya 
which was adorned with all merits. 

28. Having gone there, Astika saw the 
excellent Yagma place, full of numerous 
Sadashyas , as effulgent as the sun or Agni. 

2Q. But the best of Brahmapas, (Astika) 
was denied admittance by the door-keepers) 
and the mighty ascetic, wishing to enter into 
the (enclosed sacrificial place), pleased them 
(with blessings and sweet words.) 

30. thus having entered the excellent 
sacrificial place-, that best of Brahmanas, 
the iorempst of all virtuous men, began to 
adore tRe king of illustrious deeds, the 


Ritwijas , the Sadashyas and the sacred 
fire. 

thus ends the fifty fourth chapter, Astika , 
in the Adi Parva. 


Section 55

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Astika said:— 

1. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, Soma, Varuna and Praja- 
pati performed sacrifices at Prayaga in the 
days of yore, but your sacrifice, is in no 
way inferior to them. Blessing be upon 
those who are dear to us ! 

2. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, Indra performed one hundred 
sacrifices, but your sacrifice, is fully equal 
to his sacrifice. Blessings be upon those 
who are dear to us! 

3. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, your this sacrifice is like the 
sacrifices of Yama, Harimedha, and king 
Rantideva. Blessings be upon those who 
are dear to us l 

4. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, your this sacrifice is like the 
sacrifices of Goya, king Sashavindu, and 
king Visravana. Blessings be upon those 
who are dear to us— 

5. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, your this sacrifice is like 
the sacrifices of Nriga, Ajameda, and 
(Rama) the son of Dasharatha. Blessings 
be upon those who are dear to us ! 

6. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, your this sacrifice is like the 
sacrifice of king Yudhishthira, the son of a 
deity and a descendant of Ajameda race, 
famous even in heavens. Blessings upon 
those who are dear to us \ 

7. O son of Parikshit, O best of the 
Bharata race, your this sacrifice is like the 
sacrifice of Krishna Dwaipayana, the son of 
Satyavati, in which he himself acted as the 
chief priest. Blessings be upon those who 
are dear to us! 

8. These (learned men), that are sitting 
here, are as effulgent as the sun and they 
make your this sacrifice like the sacrifice 
of the slayer of Vitra (Indra). There is 
nothing for them to know, and gifts made 
to them become inexhaustible. • 

9. There is not a Ritwija in alt the 
worlds equal to your Rit'wija Dwaipayana. 
His disciples, becoming Ritwijas , com¬ 
petent in their duties, travel over the 
earth. 

10. The noble bearer of libations. Viva- 
vasu and Chitravanu (Fire), having gold 
for his vita! seed and black smokos on its 



ADI PARVA. 75 


way, carries these your libations of ghee to 
the celestials. 

11. There is no other king in this world 
equal to you in protecting his subjects. I 
am well pleased with your continual abste- 
nence. You are either Varuna, Yama or 
Dharmaraja. 

12. You are the protector of all crea¬ 
tures in this world, like Indra himself, 
thunder-bolt in hand. There is no man in 
this world so great as you. There is no 
king who is your equal in sacrifices. 

13. You are like Khalwanga, Nobhaga, 
and Deelip. You are like Jayati and 
Mandh&ta in prowess. You are equal to the 
sun in splendour. O royal sage of excellent 
vows, you are like Bhishma. 

14. You are like Valmiki of power con¬ 
cealed. Like Vasishta you have controlled 
yomr anger. Your sovereignty is like that of 
Indra and your splendour like that of 
Narayana. 

15. You are learned in the administra¬ 
tion of justice like Yama, and you are ador¬ 
ned with all qualifications like Krishna. 
You are the home of the wealth that be¬ 
longs to the Vasus, you are the main-spring 
of all sacrifices. 

16. You arc equal to Damvodvava in 
strength, you are learned both, in Sastras 
and arms like Parasurama. You are equal 
to Aurva and T/ita in strength. You inspire 
terror with your looks like Vagiratha, 

Sauti said:— 

17. Having thus adored them, Astika 
gratified and pleased them all, the king, the 
Sadashyas , the Ritwijas and the sacrificial 
fire. And king Janamejaya, seeing the 
signs and indications manifested on all 
sides, addressed them thus. 

thus ends thefifty -fifth Section ; Astika, 
in the Adi Parva, 


Section 56

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Janamejaya said 

1. though this (Rishi) is but a boy, 
he speaks like a wise old man. He is not 
a boy ; I think he is wise and old. 1 wish 
to bestow on him a boon. therefore, O 
Brahmanas, give me necessary permis¬ 
sion. 

The Sadaahyae said 

2. A Braiimana, though lie may be a 
boy, deserves the respect ol kings,—inure so 
if lie 15 learned. This bo> deserve to hu\e 


his all desires fulfilled, but not before 
Takshaka is here with all speed. 

Sauti said:— 

The king, being willing’to grant a boon 
to the Brahmana boy, said, “ Ask from me 
a boon, 1 ’ The Hota t being rather dis¬ 
pleased at this, said, “Takshaka has not 
as yet come to this sacrifice. 

Janamejaya stud 

4. Try your best to bring this my sacri¬ 
fice to a successful completion ; exert your 
might, so that Takshaka may cotne here 
without further delay. He is my enemy. 

The Ritwijas said 

5. O king, Takshaka is now living in 
fear in the abode of Indra. The Sastra dec-, 
lares this to us, and the Fire also says it, 

Sauti B&id 

6. The illustrious Suta, Lohitakshya, 
well-versed in the Puranas, had also said 
this before. Asked by the king again on 
this occasion, he told him what he said' 
before. 

7 . (He said), "O king, what the 
Brahmanas have said is true. Knowing as 
l do the Puranas, I say, O king, Indra j 
has granted him a boon, saying,  Live 
here in concealment and fire will not be 
able to bum you.’ ” 

8. Having heard this, the king, installed 
in the sacrifice, became very sorry and
urged the Hota to do his duty. He too, 
with Mantras , began to pour the ghee into 
the fire. Thereupon Indra hiiuselt came to' 
the place. 

9. The illustrious god came on his car, 
adored and worshipped by all the celestials 
standing around his chariot, and entertained' 
by masses ,of clouds,celestial singers and 
various classes of celestial dancing girls. 

10. Tho snake (Takshaka), however; 
kept himself hidden within the garments of 
Indra. Thereupon the king, being desirous 
of the destruction of Takshaka, spoke to 
his . 1 / antra- knowing Brahmanas thus,— 

Janamejaya said: 

11. O Brahmanas, if Takshaka be in 
tho abode of India, throw him into the fire 
with Indra also. 

Sauti said 

12. thus urged by king Janamejaya 
(to destroy Taksliaka), the Hota again and 
again poured libations (into the fire), calling 
the snake (Takshaka) by name who was 
then staying there (hidden within the gar- 

, ments ol Indra.) 



MAIIAB1IARATA. 


7 6 

13. As the libations were continually 
poured into the fire, Takshaka with Indra, 
anxious and afflicted, became visible in a 
moment i 1 the sky. 

14. Having seen that sacrifice, Indra 
was filled with fear, and casting off Tak¬ 
shaka, he hastened back to his own abode. 

15. On the departure of Indra, the king 
of snakes, Takshaka, insensible with fear, 
was brought near the sacrificial fire by 
virtue of the Mantras . 

The Ritwijas said 

16. O king of kings, O Lord, your this 
act (sacrifice) is being properly performed. 
It is now proper for you to grant a boon to 
this best of tirahmanas (Astika). 

Janamejaya said 

17. O immeasurable one, you are of 
such child-like and handsome features, 
that I desire to bestow upon you a worthy 
boon. therefore, ask that which you desire 
in your heart to possess. I promise you, I 
will grant it if it be even ungrantable. 

The Bitwijas said 

18. O king, behold, Takshaka has come 
lender your control. His terrible cries and 
loud roars are heard. 

19. The snake has been forsaken by the 
weilder of thunder-bolt (Indra). His body 
has been disabled by our Mantras. 
fbehold), he is falling from the heavens, 
(behold) the king of snakes, deprived of his 
cppsciousness, comes rolling in the sky 
breathing 

Sauti said-

20. When the king of snakes, Takshaka, 
was at the point of falling into the sacri¬ 
ficial fire,—within that very short moment,— 
Astika spoke thus,— 

Astika said 

21. O Janamejaya, if you will at alt 
grant me a boon,—‘let your this sacrifice be 
stopped, and let no more snakes fall into 
the fire. 

Sauti said 

22. O Brahmana, the son of Parikshil, 
naiing been thus addressed, became ex¬ 
ceedingly sorry and spoke lo Astika thus, 

Jaaamejaya said 

21. O illustrious man, I shall give you 
gpla, silver, kine. or whatever else vou 
desire to possess. But let trot my this sacri- 
fije be Mopped. 


Astika said — 

24. O king, I do not ask from you gold, 
silver or kine. Let your this sacrifice be 
stopped, so that my maternal relatives are 
saved. 

Sauti said 

25. thus addressed by Astika, the son 
of Parikshit (Janamejaya,) again and again 
said to that best of speakers, Astika, 

26. “O best of the best Brahmanas, O 
blessed one, O illustrious man, ask some 
other boon. 0 But, O descendant of the 
Brigu race, he did not ask any other boon. 

27. Thereupon, all ihe Sad ashy as, learned 
in the Vedas, told the king in one voice, 
“Let the Brahmana receive the boon (asked 
by him.) 

thus ends //re fifty •sixth chapter, 
Astika , in the Adi Parva . 


Section 57

(ASTIKA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Saunaka said:— 

1. O son of Suta, I desire lo hear the 
names of those snakes, that fell into the 
fire of the Snake-sacrifice. 

Sauti said 

2. O.best of the twice-born, they were 
many thousands, tens of thousands and 
millions and billions; so great was their 
number that 1 am unable even to count 
them. 

3. As far as I remember, hear, l shall 
mention the names of the principal snakes 
that fell into the fire. 

4. Hear first the names of the chief ones 
of Vasuki’s family, they were of colour, 
blue, red, and white; they were of terrible 
forms, huge bodies, and dreadful poisons. 

5—6. Helpless and  miserable, affected 
with their mother’s curse, they all fell into that 
sacrificial fire as libations of Ghee. (They 
were) Kotisa, Manasa, Puma, Sala, Pala, 
Hnlimaka, Pichchhala, Kaunapa, Sakra, 
Kalavega Prakalana, Hiranyavahu, Carana. 
Kakshaka, and Kaladantaka. 

7. These are the snakes, born of Vasuki, 
that fell into the fire. O Brahmana, numer¬ 
ous other fearful and powerful snakes, boro 
in the family of Takshaka, were burnt in 
the blazing fire. Hear, I shall mentkm their 
names now. 

8 —11.— Pachandaka, Mandalakn, Pin- 
dacktri, Kavcnuka.. Lchchika, buruva, 



ADI PARVA. 


77 


Bhangas, Vilcwateyas, Virohana, CHi, Kala- 
kara, Muka, Sukumara, Pravcpana, Mud- 
gara, Cisuroman, Soroman and Mahahanu. 

12. These snakes, born of Takshaka, 
fell into the fire. Parvata, Parijata, Pan- 
dara, Harina, Krisha, Vihanga, Sarabha, 
Meda, Promoda, Canhatapan—these, born 
in the family of Airavata, fell into the fire. 

13—14. Now hear, O best of Brahmanas, 
the names of the snakes, born in the family 
of Kauravya, that I mention. Eraka, 
Kundala Veni, Vinishandha, Kumaraka, 
Vahuka, Sringavera, Dhurtaka, Pratar, and 
Ataka,—these, born in the Kauravya family, 
fell into the fire. 

15. Now hear, O Brahmana, I mention 
those born in the family of Dhritarashtra,— 
they were all exceedingly powerful, as 
swift as the wind and full of virulent 
poison. 

16—19. Sankakarna, Pitharaka, Kuthara 
Sukhana, Shechaka, Purnaugada, Purna- 
vnukha, Prahasa, Sukuni, Dari, Amahatha, 
Kamathaka, Sushena, Manasa, Vyaya, 
Vairava, Mandavedanga, Pishanga, Udu- 
paruka, Rishaba, Vcgabata, Pindaruka, 
Mahahanu, Raktanga, Sar\asaranga, Sam- 
ridha, Patha, Vasaka, Varahaka, Viranaka, 
Suchitta Chitravegika, Parashara, Tarunka, 
Maniskandha, and Aruni. 

20. O Brahmana, thus have I recited the 
names of the chief snakes, all famous for 
their great deeds. I have not been able 
to mention all, their number being count¬ 
less. 

21. I am unable to mention the names 
of the sons of these, and again the sons of 
their sons that fell into the blazing fire. 
They are couutless. 

22. Some of them had three heads, some 
seven, and some ten. They had poison like 
the fire at the end of the Yuga , and they 
were all terrible in appearance. 

23. They had huge bodies, and great 
speed, they were as tall as mountain peaks. 
Some of them were as long as a Yama, 
some ayoyana and some tw oyoyanas. 

24. They were capable of assuming any 
form at will, and of mustering’ any strength 
at will,—they had the poison like the blazing 
fire, (such were the snakes that) that were 
burnt in the great sacrifice, affected 
by Brahma’s punishment, (their mother’s 
curse.) 

thus ends the fifty •seventh Section , 
Astika, in the Adi Parra. 


Section 58

(ASTIKA PARVA).— Continued. 

Sauti said 

1. Now hear, (I shall mention} another 
wonderful incident in connection with Astika. 
When the son of Parikshit, the king (Jana- 
mejaya) was about to grant the boon (to 
Astika), 

2. The snake, (Takshaka) though thrown 
off from Indra’s hands, remained in the air 
without falling. Thereupon, king Janame- 
jaya became thoughtful, 

3. For Takshaka, though benumbed 
with fear, did not at once fall into the fire, 
although libations were poured into the 
blazing sacrificial fire in his name and in 
the proper form. 

Saunaka said 

4. O Suta, were not the Mantras of 
those wise Brahmanas propitious ? Why 
did not Takshaka fait into the fire V 

Sauti said 

5. Astika had said thrice, 1( Stay, stay, 
stay,” to the unconscious Takshaka, the 
best of snakes, when he was cast off from 
Indra’s hands. 

6. And afflicted with grief he remained 
in the sky like a person who hang between 
the heaven and the earth. 

7. Being again and again urged by his 
Sadashyas, the king said, Let it be done 
as asked by Astika. 

8 . Let the sacrifice be stopped, let the 
snakes be saved, let this Astika be grati¬ 
fied, and let the words of the Suta be 
true.” 

9—10. When the boon was granted to 
Astika, loud acclamations of joy rose into 
the sky, and the sacrifice of the son of Pari¬ 
kshit, the king of the Pandava dynasty, 
came to an end. And king Janamejaya of 
the Bharata race was much pleased with 
himself. 

11. The king bestowed money by hun¬ 
dreds and thousands on the Pitwijas and 
Sadashyas and on all that were present there 
(in that great sacrifice). 

12—13. And he bestowed much wealth on 
Suta Lohitaksha, who was learned in the 
science of masonry and foundations, and who 
had said at the very commencement of the 
Snake-sacrifice that a Brahmana would be 
the cause of its interruption. He gave him 
various things,—food and wearing apparel. 

14. The king of immeasurable kind¬ 
ness was thus much pleased, and he conclu¬ 
ded the sacrifice according to the rites of 
the ordinance. 



7 ? 


MAHABHARATA. 


15. He sent back home in much joy the 
wise Astika, whom he treated with every 
respect. He too was exceedingly pleased,, 
because his object Was attained. 

t6. The king said to him 44 You must 
come again to become a Soda sky a in my 
great Horse-sacrifice. 0 

17. And Astika replied, “Yes. 0 He 
then returned home in great joy, having 
achieved his great object, by pleasing the 
king. 

18. Having returned in great joy to 
his uncle and mother, he touched their feet 
and told them all that had happened. 

ro. Having heard all he said, those 
snakes, that assembled there, were much 
delighted, and their fear was dispelled. 
They were greatly pleased with Astika and 
insisted him to ask a boon. 

20. They all again and again asked him 
“O learned one, what good can we do to 
you? We are exceedingly pleased with 
you, for we have been afl,saved by ypu. 
O child, (tell us) what can we dp for you ? 

Astika said 

21 . Let those Brahmanas, and other 
men, who will cheerfully and with attention 
read this sacred account of my this act, 
have no fear from you.” 

22. They said in joy, “ O nephew, as 
regards the boon asked by you, let it be 
exactly as you say. O nephew, we shall 
all cheerfully do what you ask us to do. 

23. Those that will recall to their minds, 
Asita, Astiman, and Sunitha, in the day 
or in the night, will have no fear from 
snakes. 

24. He will have no fear from snakes, who 
will say,—'Astika, the son of Jaratkaru, born 
of Jaratkaru,—Astika who saved the snakes 
from the Snakes-acrifice.—I recall him to my 
mind. therefore, O illustrious snakes, you 
should not bite me. 

25. O blessed snake, go away,—-go 
away, O snake of virulent poison. Remem¬ 
ber the words of Astika spoken after the 
Snake-sacrifice of Janamejaya/ 4 

26. Having heard the words of Astika 
mentioned, the snake, that will not cease 
to bite, will have his hood divided into one 
Hundredfold like the fruit of Singsha tree.” 

Sauti  Raid j— 

27 thus addressed by the chief snakes, 
that best of Brahmanas. (Astika), was very 
much pleased, and the illustrious (boy) then 
thought of going away. 

28. That virtuous and the best of the 
twice born, having thus saved_ the snakes 


from the Snake-sacrifice, died at the proper 
time, leaving sons and grandsons behind 
him. 

29. thus have 1 narrated to you the 
history of Astika, exactly as it happened,— 
a history, which if narrated, dispells all fear 
of snakes. 

30. O Brahamana, O best of the Vrieu- 
race, as your ancestor Pramati had gladly 
narrated it to his enquiring son Ruru, 

31. And as I heard it (from my father) 

I have narrated this blessed history of the 
learned As.ika from the beginning (to the 
end.) 

32. O Brahman, O chastiser of foes, 
(now you have) heard this sacred history 
of Astika,—a history which increases virtue, 
—and which you asked me to narrate after 
hearing the story of the Dunduva, let now 
your great curiosity be satisfied. 

thus ends the fifty-eighth shatter. Snake - 
sacrifice , and thus ends the Astika Parva in 
the Adi Parva of the blessed Mahabharatd . 


Section 59

(AD 1 VANSABATARANA PARVA.) 

Saun&ka said 

I. O child, O Sauti, you have narrated to 
me this great and extensive history of the 
Brigu race from the birth of Brigu. I am 
much pleased with you. 

2—3. O son of Suta, I ask you now to 
recite to me that wonderful and varied nar¬ 
rations composed by Vyasa, which were 
recited by tne illustrious Sadashyas in the 
intervals of the long-extending ceremony 
(Snake-sacrifice). 

4. O son of Suta, I wish to learn from 
you the object of those narrations. There¬ 
fore, recite them to me in full. 

Sauti said 

5. The Brahmanas spoke of many things, 
founded on the Vedas, in the internals of their 
duties, but Vyasa recited the wonderful and 
great history, called the Bharala. 

Saunaka said •— 

6. —7. I desire to hear that sacred history, 
called Mahabharata, that spreader of the 
fame of the Pandavas, which Krishna Dwai- 

ayana, asked by Janamejaya, caused to 
e duly recited in the intervals of the sacri¬ 
fice. 

8. It was born in the ocean-tike mind of 
the great Rishi of purified soul. O best of 
men, recite it to me, for, O son of Suta, my 
thirst has not been appeased by all that >ou 
have narrated, 



Sauti  said: 

9. I shall recite from the beginning the 

f reat and excellent history, called Maha- 
harata, composed by Krishna Dwaipayana. 

10. Listen to it! in full, O Brahmana, as 
1 recite it. I myself feel a great pleasure 
in reciting it. 

thus ends the fifty-ninth Section , Adi- 
vansabatarna , in the Adi Parva . 


Section 60

(ADIVANSABATARANA PARVA.) 

Continued , 

Sauti  said 

1. Having heard that Janamejaya had 
been installed in the Snake-sacrificc, the 
learned Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana went 
there. 

2. The grandfather of the Pandavas, 
(Krishna Dwaipayana) was born in an island 
of the Yamuna, in the womb of the maiden 
Kali by Sakti’s son Parasara. 

3. As soon as born, the illustrious man 
developed his body by his will alone, and 
mastered the Vedas and the Vedangas and 
all the histories. 

4. He acheived that which could not be 
achieved by asceticism, or by the study of 
the Vedas, by vows, by fasts, by progeny or 
by sacrifice, 

5. The best of the best Veda-knowing 
men first divided the Vedas into four parts. 
He was a great Brahma-knowing Rishi, a 
great poet, a truthful man, a holy ascetic. 

6. That great Rishi of sacred deeds and 

f reat fame, in order to continue the line of 
antanu begot Pandu, Dhritarashtra and 
Vidura. 

7. This illustrious man accompanied 
by his disciple, learned in the Vedas 
and the Vedangas, entered the sacrificial 
grounds of the royal sage Janamejaya. 

8. He saw there seated king Jana¬ 
mejaya surrounded by his numerous Sada- 
shy ays like a Indra surrounded by the 
celestials. 

9. He was surrounded by kings of vari- 
ou scountries who had undergone the sacred 
baths and by competent Ritwijas , like 
Brahma, himself all seated comfortably in 
the sacrificial grounds. 

to. The best of the Bharata race, the 
royaJ sage Janamejaya, seeing the Rishi 
approaching, advanced quickly in great joy 
with all his relatives and followers. 


11. The king, with the approval of the 
Sadashyas , offered a golden seat to the Rishi 
as did Indra to (his preceptor) Vrihaspati. 

12. When the boon-granting and the 
adored of the celestials, the Rishis (Vyasa) 
took his seat, the . king of kings 
(Janamejaya) worshiped him according to 
the ordinances. 

13. The king then offered to his grand¬ 
father Krishna (Dwaipayana) in due form 
water to wash his feet and mouth, Argha 
and kine. 

14. Vyasa was much pleased on accept¬ 
ing the offerings from the Pandava 
Janamejaya, and he ordered that the kine 
should not be slaughtered. 

15. thus having worshipped him the 
king bowed to his greatest grandfather. 
Ana having seated himself in joy, he asked 
him about his welfare. 

16. The illustrious Risbi also looked 
(graciously) at him and asked him about his 
welfare. He then worshipped the Sadashyas 
who had already worshipped him. 

17. Thereupon with joined hands, Jana¬ 
mejaya, with all his Sadashyas , addressed 
the best of the Brahmanas (Vyasa) thus 

Janamejaya said 

18. O Brahmana, you saw with your 
own eyes the great deeds of the Kurus and 
the Pandavas. 1 desire to hear them nar¬ 
rated by you. 

19—20. What was the cause of the 
quarrel between them ? They were all of 
great deeds and virtuous mind. Why 
did that great battle, which was the 
cause of the death of countless men, occur 
among my grandfathers, their sense being 
(surely) overclouded by Fate? O best of 
Brahmanas, tell me all this in full as they 
happened. 

Sauti  said 

21. Having heard these words of Jana¬ 
mejaya, Krishna Dwaipayana addresed his 
disciple Vaishampayana, seated by his side 
saying,— 

Vyasa said:— 

22. Repeat, exactly as you heard from 
me the account of the quarrel between the 
Kurus ar.d the Pandavas of old. 

Sauti  said 

23. .That best of Brahmanas, (Vaisham¬ 
payana), having been thus commanded by 
his preceptor, recited the whole of that old 
history, 

24. To the king, to the Sadashyas , and to 
all the chiefs and potentates present there. 



8o 


MAHABHAraTA. 


He told them all about the quarrel and the 
utter extinction of the Kurus and the Pan- 
davas. 

thus ends the sixtieth Section , Adi - 
vansabatarana f in the Adi Parva . 


Section 61

(ADIVANSABATARANA PARVA.)— 
Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1-2. Bowing down first to my preceptor 
with the eight parts of my body touching 
the ground, and then worshipping with de¬ 
votion, reverence and singleness of mind all 
the Brahmanas and learned men (present 
here), I shall now recite in full the narration, 
I heard from the best of intelligent men, 
the high-souled great Rishi, Vyasa. 

3. O king, you are a proper person to 
hear the history of Bharata. I feel no fear 
to perform this great act (reciting the 
Bharata,) encouraged as 1 am by my pre- 
ceptoh 

4. Hear, l O king, why the quarrel 
between the Kurus and the Pandavas occur¬ 
red and how occurred the exile (of .the 
Pandavas) as the result of the game at dice/ 
prompted by the desire of the Kurus to 
gain the kingdom, 

5. And how the battle was faught to 
exterminate all men. O best of the Bharata 
race, 1 shall relate all this to you as you ask 
me. 

6. On the death of their father, these 
heroes (the Pandavas) came back to their 
own home from the forest. They became 
experts in the science of archery within a 
very short time. 

7. The Kauravas became jealous of the 
Pandavas, who were all gifted with great 
physical strength, energy, and jhjwer of 
mind. They were also very popular with 
the citizens. 

$. Thereupon, the wicked-minded Dur- 
yodhana, with Karna and the son of Suvala, 
(Shakuni), tried to banish them, and perse 
cuted them in various ways. 

y. The wicked-minded Duryodhana, 
guided by that bird of the evil omen, 
(Shakuni), persecuted the Pandavas by 
various means in order to have the .un¬ 
disputed possession of the kingdom. 

10. That wretch of the son of Dhrita- 
rastra gave poison to Bhima with his food, 
but that hero digested it. 

11. That wretch one day bound the 
sleeping Blimia on the bank of the Gauges. 


and throwing him into the water, went 
away. 

12. But when the strong-armed Bhima. 
the son of Kunti, awoke, he tore up the 
strings with which he was bound, and his 
pains were all gone. 

13. While asleep, he was caused to be 
bitten in every part of his U.dy by black 
snakes of virulent poisons, but that chastiser 
of foes did not still perish. 

14. In all these various persecutions of 
the Pandavas by the Kurus, the high-souled 
Vidura was always engaged in counter¬ 
acting their evil designs and in saving the 
persecuted Pandavas. 

15. As Indra keeps the heavens and 
earth in happiness, so did Vidura always 
keep the Pandavas in happiness. 

10—17.—When Duryodhana found him¬ 
self incapable of destroying the Pandavas 
who were protected by Fate and kept alive 
for graver objects, by various secret and 
open means he called together his coun¬ 
cillors, Karna, Dushasana and others. 
He then caused a house of lac to be built 
with the knowledge of Dhritarashtra. 

18. That king, the son of Ambika v 
(Dhritarashtra), out of affection for his 
sons and being tempted by the desire of 
sovereignty, sent them (the Pandavas) to 
exile. 

19. They (the Pandavas) went away 
with their mother from Hastinapur, and 
when they went away, the son of the Vaisya 
woman (Vidura) became the adviser of 
those illustrious men. 

20. Being saved through him from the 
house of lac, they fled at the dead of night 
to a deep forest. They, the sons of Kunti, 
came to a city, called Varanavata ; 

21. And those chastisers of foes, those 
illustrious men, lived there with their mother 
in the house of lac, as commanded by Dhri¬ 
tarastra. 

22. They lived in the house for one 
year, watchfully protecting themselves from 
Purochana. In the meantime they dug 
a subterranean passage according to tha 
directions of Vidura. 

23. They then set fire to the house of 
lac and burnt Purochana. They, those 
chastisers of foes, then fled with their mother 
in anxiety and iti fear. 

24—25, They saw, near a fountain in the 
forest, a fearful Rakshasa named Hirimba. 
They killed that .king of Rakshasas. They, 
the sons of Prltha, afraid of the sons of 
Dhritaiastra, then fled in the darkness, so 
that they might not run the risk of bting 



ADJ PARVA, 


8l 


seen bv any body. Here did Bhima ac¬ 
quire ftirimba of whom Ghatatkacha was 
born. 

26. The Pandavas of rigid vows, learned 
in the Vedas, then came to a place, called 
Ekchakra, and lived there as Brahma - 
charies. 

27. They, those best of men, with their 
mother lived there for some time in the 
house of a Brahmana, in temperance and in 
abstinence. 

28. It was here that the mighty-armed 
Bhima met with a greatly powerful, and 
hungry man-eating Rakshasa, named 
Vaka. 

29. The best of men, the son of Pandu, 
Bhima, soon killed him with the strength of 
his arms, and thus made the citizens safe 
and fearless. 

30. They then heard of the Swayamvara 
of Krishna, (Draupadi) the daughter of the 
king of Panchala. Having heard it, they 
went there and obtained her. 

31. Having obtained Draupadi, they 
lived there for a year. And then those 
chastisers of foes, having been known, went 
back to Hastinap.ir. 

32. They were then told by the son of 
Shantanu, king Dhritarashtra, as follows :— 
O dear children, so that dissensions may 
not take place among you all brothers and 
cousins, 

33—35 We have settled that Khandava- 
prastha will be your abode. therefore, 
casting of all jealousies go to live at 
Khandavaprastha, which contains many 
towns and broad roads, n Having heard these 
words, they (the Pandavas), with all their 
friends ana followers, went to Khandava¬ 
prastha, taking with them many jewels and 
precious stones. And the sons of Pritha lived 
there for many years. 

36. They .brought by the force of their 
arms many chiefs and potentates under their 
subjugation. Setting their hearts on virtue 
ana firmly adhering to truth, 

37. Being unexcited by wrath, being calm 
in demeanour, and putting down numerous 
evils, the Pandavas gradually rose in power. 
The greatly illustrious Bhima subjugated the 
East. 

38. The heroic Arjuna conquered the 
North ; Nakula the West and the slayer of 
heroic foes, Sahadeva, the South. 

39. Having done this their kingdom 
extended over the whole world. Each like 
a sun in splendour, they looked like five 
suns ; 

40-41. And the earth appeared to have 
six suns on account of the presence of the 


heroic Pandavas. Then for some reasons 
the just king Yudhishthira sent to the forest 
his greatly powerful and heroic brother 
Shabvashachi (Arjuna), dearer to him than 
life itself. 

42. That best of men, the self-controlled 
and virtuous (Arjuna) lived in the forest for 
eleven years and ten months. 

43. thus roving about in many places, 
on one occasion, he went to Krishna in 
Dwarka and he obtained there for his wife 
the lotus-eyed, 

44. And sweet-speeched younger sister 
of Krishna, named Suvadra. Like Sachi 
with the great Indra and like Lakshmi 
with Krishna, 

45—46. Suvadra was much pleased to be 
united with Arjuna, the son of Pandu. O 
best of kings, the son of Kunti with Krishna 
then gratified Agni by giving him the 
Khandava to bum. Tne task did not 
at all appear heavy to Arjuna, assisted as 
he was by Krishna, 

47. As nothing is a heavy task to Vishnu, 
in the matter of destroying his enemies. 
Agni gave to the son of rritha the excellent 
bow Gandiva, 

48. An inexhaustible cjuiver, and one 
warchariot, bearing an ape as its standard. 
On this occasion did Arjuna rescue the 
frightened great Asura Moya. 

49. And he (Moya) built the beautiful 
assembly-room, adorned with all sorts of 

t 'ewels and precious stones. Seeing this 
wilding, the wicked Duryodhana was tempt¬ 
ed to possess it. 

50. Thereupon he deceived Yudhishthira 
by means of a game, played by the son of 
Subala (Sakum), and he sent him to the 
forest for twelve years, 

51. And another additional year to live 
in concealment, thus making the period (of 
banishment) complete thirteen years. On 
the fourteenth year, when they (the Panda¬ 
vas) returned and claimed their kingdom, 

52—53. O King, they did not get it. 
Thereupon war was declared, and the Pan¬ 
davas, after exterminating the whole race of 
Kshatriyas, and killing Icing Duryodhana 
obtained back their kingdom. This is the 
history of the Pandavas, who never acted 
under the influence of evil passions. O best 
of kings, this is the account of the dissen¬ 
sion that ended in the loss of their kingdom 
by the Kurus and of the victory of the 
Pandavas. 

thus ends the sixty first Section , Adi 
vansabatarana, in the Adi Parta, 



Section 62 
ADIVANSABATARANA PARVA.— 
(Continued.) 

Janamejaya said:— 

1. O best of Brahmanas, you have told 
me in brief the history called Mahabharata, 
containing the great deeds of the Kurus. 

2. O great ascetic, recite now fully this 
wonderful history. I feel a great curiosity 
to hear it. 

3. You should, therefore, recite it in full. 
1 am not satisfied with hearing in the abs¬ 
tract this great history. 

4. It could not be a trifling cause for 
which the virtuous Pandavas killed those 
whom they should not have killed and for 
which they are still praised by men. 

5. Why did those best of men, (the 
Pandavas), capable of avenging themselves 
on their enemies, though innocent, quietly 
suffered the persecutions of the wicked 
Kurus ? 

6. O best of Brahmanas, why did the 
mighty armed Bhima, having the strength 
of ten thousand elephants, though persecut¬ 
ed, patiently kept his anger down ? 

7. Why did not the chaste Krishna, the 
daughter of Drupada, though persecuted by 
the wicked (Kurus), bum the sons of Dhri- 
tarastra by her angry eyes,—capable as she 
was to do it ? 

8. Why did the two sons of Pritha, 
(Bhima and Arjuna) and the two sons of 
Madri (Nakula and Sahadeva) those best of 
men, though persecuted by the wretches, 
follow Yudhishtira, who was addicted to the 
evil habit of gaming ? 

9. Why did Yudhishtira, the best of 
all virtuous men and the son of Dharma 
himself, though acquainted with all duties, 
suffer great afflictions? 

10. Why did the son of Pandu, Arjuna, 
Krishna himself being his charrioteer and 
who could by his arrows send to the other 
world hosts of fighting men, suffer so many 
persecutions ? 

11. O great Rishi, tell me all this as they 
happened. (Tell me) everything that those 
highly mighty car-warriors did. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

12—13. O great king, appoint a time (to 
hear it). This history is very extensive. 
This is but the beginning. I shall recite the 
whole of this history, composed by the il¬ 
lustrious Krishna Dwaipayana, the great 
Rishi, Vyasa of immeasurable mental 
power, who is adored by all the world. 


14. This (Bharata) contains one lac 
sac ed slokas, composed by the son of SatyA- 
vati, Vyasa of immeasurable mental power. 

15. The learned man who reads it to 
others, and those that hear it read, go to 
the world of Brahma and become equal to 
the celestials. 

16. This (Bharata) is equal to the Vedas; 
it is holy and excellent ; it is the worthiest of 
all that should be listened to. It is a 
Purana, adored by the Rishis. 

17. It contains many useful instructions 
on Artha and Kama. This sacred history 
makes the heart desire to attain salvation. 

18. The learned men earn much 
wealth by reciting this Veda to those who 
are noble, liberal, truthful and believing. 

19—20. Sins, even of killing embryo, is 
destroyed by (reading or hearing) it. Even 
a greatly sinful man, by hearing this history, 
escapes from all his sins, like the sun from 
Rahu. This history is called Jaya (victory) ; 
it should be heard by those that desire 
victory. 

21. Hearing it, a king can bring the 
whole world under his subjection and defeat 
all his foes. It is a mighty act of propitia¬ 
tion ; it is a great sacrifice, productive of 
blessed fruits. 

22. It should be heard by the crown- 
princes with their wives, for then they beget 
a heroic son and a daughter who occupies a 
throne. 

23. It is the Dharma Sastra , it is also the 
sacred Artha Sastra , it is also the great 
Moksha Sastra } so said Vyasa of immeasur¬ 
able intelligence. 

24. It is recited in the present age and 
will be recited in future ages. He, who hears 
it, gets sons and survitors, who perform their 
favourite works. 

25. He who hears it escapes immediately 
from all his sins that are committed by him 
in body, word or mind. 

26. He who hears the history of the 

Bharata race without being fault-finding, 
can have no fear from diseases, let alone 
the fear of the other world.  

27—30. In order to extend the fame of the 
high-souled Pandavas and other kshatiyas, 
learned in all branches of knowledge, high- 
spirited and already famous in the world for 
their great deeds, Krishna Dwaipayana, 
moved by the desire of benifitting the world, 
has composed this excellent, sacred, and big 
work which spreads one's fame and gives 
one a lengthy life. He who, from the 
desire of acquiring virtue, causes this 
history to be heard m this world  by holy 
Brahmanas, gains inexhaustible virtue. 

He who recites the history of the Kurus, 
becomes immediately pure and holy, 

31. He acquiries large family and becomes 
respected in the world. The Brahmana, 
who reads the holy Bharata regularly, 

32. ' For the four rainy months of the year, 
is cleansed of all his sins. He, who has read 
the Bharata, may be regarded as one who 
has studied the Vedas. 

33. In it have been described the celestials, 
the royal sages, the holy and regenerate 
Rishis, the sinless Keshava (Krishna.) 

34. The god of gods, (Mahadeva) the 
goddess Parvati, the birth of Kartikeya, 
who had many mothers, 

35. And the greatness of Brahmanas and 
kine. It is a collection of all Srutis , and a 
work worthy to be heard by virtuous-minded 
men. 

36. The learned man, who recites it to 
Brahmanas during the sacred Parvus (lunar 
changes), is cleaused of all his sins, and 
being victorious over heaven (not caring 
for it) attains to an union with Brahma. 

37. He who causes even a single line of it 
to be heard by Brahmanas at a Sradh , that 
Sradh becomes inexhaustible, and the 
Pitris (ancestors) become gratified with 
food presented to them. 

38. The sins that are committed daily by 
our senses and by our mind, and those that 
are committed knowingly or unknowingly by 
any man, 

30. Are all destroyed by hearing the 
Mahabharata.—The history of the great 
births of the Bharata princes is called 
Mahabharata. 

40. He who knows the etymology of the 
name (Bharata) is cleansed of all his sins. 
As this history of the Bharata race is won¬ 
derful, 

41. therefore, when recited, it purifies 
men from their sins. The Rishi Krishna 
Dwaipayana completed it in three years. 

42. Rising daily (in the morning), puri¬ 
fying himself (by ablutions), and perform¬ 
ing all his religious duties, (he composed 
this Mahabharata). 

43. therefore, the Brahmanas should 
hear, with prescribed rules, this holy history, 
this excellent narration of Bharata, com- • 
posed by Krishna (Dwaipayana.) 

44- The Brahmanas who recite it for 
other to hear it, and those who hear it, in j 
whatever state  they may be, can never be 
affected by the fruits of good or bad deeds. 

.45 The man, who is desirous of acquiring 
tktue, should hear it all. It is equal to afi 


histories in the world, and he who hears it 
acquires purity of heart. 

46. The bliss that one enjoys in attaining 
heaven is scarcely equal to that which one 
derives from hearing this greatly holy history. 

47. The virtuous man, who hears or 
causes it to be heard with reverence, obtains 
the fruits of a Rajshuya or Ashwamedka 
sacrifice. 

48. This Bharata is said to be a mine of 
gems, as the illustrious ocean or the great 
mountain. 

49. This (Bharata) is sacred and excel¬ 
lent, and it equals the Vedas in sanctity. It 
is worthy of being heard, it is pleasing to 
the ear, it is sin-cleansing ana virtue-in¬ 
creasing. 

50. O king, he who gives a copy of 
Mahabharata to one who asks for it, does 
give (not a copy of a book, but) the whole 
of the earth having a belt of seas. 

51. O son of Parikshit, this pleasant 
and sacred history that secures victory, (to 
the hearer), I shall now recite to you in full. 
Listen to it. 

52. The Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana, 
regularly rising (every morning) for three 
years, composed this wonderful history, called 
Mahabharata . 

53. O best of the Bharata race, whatever 
about Dharma, Artha and Kama, that is 
contained in this Bharata, may be met with 
elsewhere ; but whatever is not in it, is not 
to be found any where. 

thus ends the sixty second Section ; Adiv 
ansdbatarana , in the Adi Parva. 


Section 63
(ADIVANSABATARANA PARVA.)— 

Continued . 

Vaishampayana said 

1. There was a king, ever devoted to 
virtue, named Uparichara. He was very 
much addicted to hunting. ' 

2. That son of Paurava, 4 (IJparidiara) 
‘called also Vasu, dtyectid By Tiidra, con¬ 
quered the beautiful and excellent kingdom 
of Chedi. 

3 . The king, .sometime after, giving up 
the use of arms, and dwelling in a secluded 
retreat, practised severe asceticism. The 
celestials with Indra at their head one day 
came to the king. 

4- Believing that he sought to he the 
king of the celestials by practising severe 
austerities, the celestials, appearing be¬ 
fore him, succeeded with sweet words in 
winning him from his asceticism. 

The Celestials said 

5. O king of the world, you should see 

that piety may not sustain a diminution in 
your hands. Protected by you, piety 
will protect the universe. ! 

Indra said 

6. Protect attentively and rigidly piety 
on earth. Protecting virtue on earth, you 
will see many sacred regions (in after-life.) 

7—-8. though I belong to heaven and 
you to earth, yet you are my friend and 
you are dear to me. O king of men, live 
m that place in earth which is delightful, 
which is full of animals, wealth and corn, 
which is sacred, which is well-protected like 
heaven, and which is blessed with fertility, 
which has agreeable climate and every object 
of enjoyment. 

9. O king of Chedi, this Chedi, your 
kingdom, is full of riches, gems, and preci¬ 
ous stones. It contains much mineral 
wealth. 

10. The cities in this kingdom arc all 
devoted to virtue. The people are honest 
and contented. They never speak false¬ 
hood even in jest. 

11. The sons never divide their wealth 
here with their fathers. They are always 
mindful of their parent’s welfare. Lean kine 
are never yoked to the plough or to the cart 
engaged in carrying merchandise. 

12. They are all well-fed and fat. O 
reverencer of the celestials, the four castes 
are engaged in doing their respective duties 
in Chedi. Let nothing in the three worlds 
remain unknown to you. 

13. I shall give you an excellent and 
great crystal car, which the celestials alone 
possess, and which is capable of carrying 
you through the sky. 

14. You only, among all mortals on 
earth, will ride on that best of cars, and 
go through the sky like a celestial, though 
possessing a physical body. 

15. I shall also give you a victory-producing 
garland of unfading lotuses; wearing which 
you shall not be wounded.

16. O lion among men, take 
this excellent,and great garland. 


Vaishampayana said 

17. The slayer of Vitra (Indra) gave 
him also a bamboo-stick to protect the 
honest and the peaceful. 

18. After the expiration of a year, the 
king planted it on the ground for the pur¬ 
pose of worshipping the giver, (Indra.) 

19. O king, from that day up to this 
day, all kings, following the example of 
Vasu, began to plant a bamboo-stick on the 
ground to worship Indra. 

20. Alter planting the stick, they cover 
it with golden cloths, perfume it with scents
and decorate it with garlands and various 
ornaments. 

21—23. The god Indra was thus wor¬ 
shipped in due form with garlands and 
ornaments. The god, assuming the form 
of a swan, came himself to accept the wor¬ 
ship thus offered. The great Indra was 
much pleased to see the auspicious worship 
thus made by Vasu, the best of kings, and 
said to him, “Those men and kings who will 
worship me, 

24. And will observe this my festival 
like the king of Chedi, will gain wealth and 
victory for their countries and kingdoms. 


25—26. Their cities will also expand 
and will be ever in joy.” O king, Vasu, the 
great monarch, was thus blessed by the 
high-souled chief of the celestials, Maghavat 
Indra. Those men, who cause this festival 
of Indra to be observed 


27. With the gifts of lands, gems, and 
precious stones, like king Vasu, become 
much respected in the worlds. 

28. —29. Vasu, the King of Chedi, thus 
being blessed by Indra, and bestowing boons 
and performing great sacrifices, continued 
to observe the festival of Indra. He had 
five greatly powerful, and immeasurably 
effulgent scihs. 


30. The emperor (Vasu) installed his 
sons in many kingdoms. His illustrious 
son Vrihadratha,—a great car-warrior,— 
was installed in the kingdom of Magadha. 


31. His other sons were Pratyagriha, and 
Kusamva, who was also called Manivahana. 
Two others were. M a villa and Yaduk who 
was greatly powerful and invincible in 
battle. 


32. O king
greatly effulgent
founded 
names. 
these were the sons of that 
great royal sage. 

33. And thus he travelled through space.

34. The Gandharvas and Apsaras came 
to adore that illustrious man. And because 
he moved through the upper regions (in his 
car), he was called Upanchara . 

35. The river which flowed by his capital, 
was once attacked by a living mountain call¬ 
ed Koiahal Suktimati , who was maddened 
by lust, 

3 6: The mountain was kicked by Vasu, 
and the river came out of the] embrace of 
the mountain by the indentation caused by 
his kick. 

37. From this embrace of the mountain, 
the river gave birth to a twin,—a son and 
a daughter, ahd the river, grateful to Vasa, 
gave them both to him. 

38. The best of royal sages and the 
giver of wealth and the punisher of enemies, 
(Vasu) made the son of the river the generalissimo 
of his army. 

39—40. The King made the daughter 
of the river who was called Girika his wife ; 
and Girika, the wife of Vasu, purifying her¬ 
self by a bath when her season of impurity 
came, told her state to her husband. But 
that very day the ancestors of Vasu came 
to him ; 

41. And they asked that best of kings and 
foremost of wise men to kill deers to perform their sradh ; 
and the King, thinking 
that the command of his ancestors should 
not be disobeyed.

42. Went out to hunt (the deer) Vasu thinking 
of Girika who was exceedingly beautiful 
and was like Sree herself. 

43. There were, (in the forest in which the 
king went to hunt) many Asoka, Champaka. 
Chutas, Atimuktas, Punnagas, Kamikaras, 
Vakula, Divya-patala, 

44. Patala, Narikela, Chandana, Arjuna 
and various otheo beautiful, , sacred and 
great trees, full of fragrant flowers and 
sweet fruits. 

45 The whole forest was maddened by 
the sweet notes of' Kokilas-and echoed with 
the hum of intoxicated bees. It was the 
season of spring, and the forest in which 
the king was roaming was as beautiful as 
the gardens of Kuvera. 

46. The king was filled with desire, 
but he did not find Girika by him. Maddened by 
desire the king roamed here and 
there; and he saw, 

47. A beautiful Asoka tree, decked with 
immense foliage and its branches so covered 
with flowers.

49. He breathed the delicious breeze 
blowing slowly all over the forest. 
He became so much excited

53. The king, learned in the subtle truths 
of Dharma , Artha , and Kama , saw a swift 
hawk resting very near him. He addres¬ 
sed the bird thus, 

54. O amiable bird, take this to my wife 
Girika, and give it to her. She is now in 
her season. 

55. The swift hawk took it from the king 
and flew rapidly through the sky. 

56. When fie was thus flying through the 
sky, he was seen by another hawk, and thinking 
that he was carrying some meat he 
flew at him. 

57. The two birds fought together with' 
their beaks, and when they were thus fight¬ 
ing, the seed fell into the waters of tne 
Yamuna. 

58. There in the Yamuna lived an Apsara, 
known by the name Adrika, who dwelt in 
the water of the river as a fish,—it was the 
result of the curse of a Brahmana on her. 

59. The fish, Adrika, rapidly came to 
the spot where Vasu's seed fell from the 
daws of the hawk, and she swallowed it at 
once. 

60. Some time after, this fish (Adrika) 
was caught by the fishermen. O best of the 
Bharata race, it was the tepefy iponth aftejo 
she swallowed the seed. 

61. There came but from the stomach 
of this fish two children of hutrian form,- 1 - 
one a boy arid the other was a girV. ; Th£ 
fishermen were very much astonished (to 
see this wbnderful phenomenon), and they 
went to king Uparichara (Vasu). 

62. They said, O king, these two,— 
(the boy and the girl) have beep born in the 
womb of a fish. The king Uparichara 
took the male chi let 

63. That child became afterwards the 
virtuous and powerful monarch, named 
Matsa. The Apsara was also released front 
her form as soon as the children were born, 

64. Because she had been told before by 
the illustrious one that she would be released 
from her piscatorial form after giving birth 
to two human children. 

65. Now according to these words, having 
en birth to the two children and being 
ed by the, fishermen, she left the form of 

the fish and assumed her own :cdfcstial 
form. 

66. The excellent Apsara then rose on (the 

path trodden by Stddhas, Rishis and CAe- 
W. ' The daugfcc& of the 

Apshrd  ■ ■ 



86 


MAHABHARAFA. 


67. Was then given by the king to the 
fishermen, saying, “Let this (child) oe your 
daughter.” She was gifted with great beauty, 
and possessed of every virtue. 

68. That girl of sweet smiles, was known 
by the name of Satyavati ; but owing to her 
association with fishermen, she was for 
years of fishy smell. 

• 69. Wishing to serve her father (the 
fisherman), she plied a boat on the waters 
of the Yamuna. Parashara when going 
to the pilgrimage, saw her one day. 

70. She was exceedingly beautiful,—an 
object of desire with even a Siddha. As 
soon as the wise Rishi saw the girl of sweet 
smiles, he desired to have her. 

71. The best of Rishis (Parashara) ad¬ 
dressed the daughter of Vasu, the girl of 
celestial beauty and tapering thighs, saying, 
44 O blessed girl, accept my embraces.” 

72. She replied, 44 O holy Rishi, see, the 
Rishis are standing on both the banks of the 
river. Seen by them, how can I grant your 
wish ?” 

73. thus addressed by her, the illustrious 
lord (Parashara) created a fog, by which the 
whole place was covered with darkness. 

74. Seeing the sudden creation of the 
fog by the great Rishi, the girl was very 
much astonished and became suffused with 
blushes of bashfulness. 

Satyavati said 

75. O holy Rishi, know me to be a girl 
under the control of my father. O sinless 
man, my virginity will be sullied by accepting 
your embraces. 

76. O best of Brahmanas, O Rishi, my 
virginity beingsollied, how shall 1 be able to 
return home ? I shall not then be able to bear 
life. O illustrious one, take all this into your 
(kind) consideration, and do what is proper. 

Vaishampayana said 

77. That best of Brahmanas, (Parashara), 
having been much pleased with all that she 
said, replied 44 You shall remain a virgin 
even after associating with me. 

78. O timid girl, O beauteous maiden, 
ask from me any boon you desire to have. 
O beauty of sweet smiles, my favour (boon) 
has never proved fruitless.” 

79. Having been thus addressed, the 
maiden (Satyavati) asked for the boon that 
her body might be sweet-scented; and the 
illustrious Rishi granted that wish of her 
totart:' 

• 8<v Having obtained the boon, she be¬ 
came exceedingly pleased, She was in her 


season, and she accepted the embraces of 
that Rishi of wonderful deeds. i 

81. Thenceforth she became known among 
men by the name of Gandhavati (sweet- 
seen ted.) Men could smell sweet scent of her 
body from a distance of a Yoyona. 

82. Thence she was also called Yoyana • 
gandha. After all this, the illustrious Para¬ 
shara went away to his home (hermitage). 

83. Satyavati was exceedingly pleased to 
receive the excellent boon, and she there 
upon, on that very day, conceived through 
the embraces of Parashara. 

84. She gave birth on an island in the 

Yamuna, a greatly powerful child, begotten 
on her by Parashara ; and the child with the 
permission of her mother adopted asce- j 
ticism. 1 

85. He went away saying, 44 As soon as 
I shall be remembered by you on any occa¬ 
sion, 1 shall (immediately) appear before 
you.” thus was born Dwaipayana in the 
womb of Satyavati by Parashara. 

86. Because he was born on an island, he 
was called Dwaipayana. That learned man 
(Dwaipayana), knowing that Dharma would 
become lame by one leg at each Yuga , 

87. And that the period of human lifeand 
strength would follow the Yuga (by becom¬ 
ing snorter and lesser), and moved by the 
desire of obtaining the favour of Brahma and 
the Brahmanas, 

88 . Arranged the Vedas, and thence he 
came to be called Vyasa. He then taught 
the Vedas and the fifth Veda Mahabharaie . 

89. To Sumanta, Jaimini, Paila, his own 
son Suka, and his disciple Vaishampayana 
(myself). 

90. The Bharata Sanhita was published 
by him separately through these men. Then 
was born in the womb of Ganga by Shantanu, 
Bhishma, 

91. Of great energy, fame and immea¬ 
surable prowess. There was an illustrious 
and famous Rishi, learned in the interpreta¬ 
tion of the Vedas, 

92. That greatly famous man was known 
by the name of Animandavya. though 
innocent, he was accused of theft and was 
put on a shula . 

93. Thereupon, the great Rishi called 
Dharma and addressed him thus,— 44 In my 
childhood I pierced a little fly with a blade 
of grass. 

94. O Dharma, I remem b er this sin of 
mine ; I cannot remember any other#] 
have since practised asceticism thousand 
fold. Has not that one sin el mint hem 
expittated by my great asceticism I 



ADI PAAVA. 


87 


The killing of a Brahitiana is more 
hemous than any other sin in the world ; (As 
you kill me) O Dharma, you shall take birth 
on earth, (and that too) in the Sudra 
caste. 

96. thus being cursed, Dharma was 
bora a Sudra as Vidura who was learned, 
virtuous and pure-bodied. 

97. The Suta, San jay a, who was like a 
Rishi, was begot by Gavalgana, and the 
greatly powerful Karna was begot by Surya 
on Kunti when she was a maid. 

98. He came out of his mother's womb 
with a natural coat of mail and with a face 
beautified by ear-rings. For the bcnifit of the 
whole world, the world-wide famous, 

99. Vishnu himself, the worshipped diety 
of all the worlds, was begot by Vasudeva on 
Devaki. He is the great Goa without birth 
and death; he is the creator and lord of 
the universe. 

loo". He is called by the learned the 
invisible cause of all, he knows no dete¬ 
rioration, he is the first Brahma, he is the 
abode of the three qualities (Satya, Raja 
and Tama), he is the great soul, he is 
undeteriorating, he is the first, the cause 
of the creation, the Nature, the con¬ 
trolling Lord. 

toi. He is the Purusha, the Creator 
himself, he is the centre of Satya Guna , 
he is infinite, he is incapable of being 
moved, he is the diety, he is Lord 
Narayana; 

102. He is Dhata, he is undeteriorating, 
he is effulgent, he is the best, he is the 
great combiner, the increate, the invisible 
essence of all, and the great immutable. 
He is bereft of those attributes that are 
knowable by the senses, he is the universe 
itself without beginning, birth and decay. 

103. This great being, possessed of infinite 
wealth, this Grandsire of all creatures, took 
his birth in the race of Andhaka—Vrishnis, 
in order to increase the piety in the world. 

104. Satyaki and Kritavarma, learned 
in the science of arms, possesed of great 
prowess, well versed in all the Sastras t 
ever obidient to Narayana, 

105—107. And expert in the use of arms, 
were begot by Satyaka and Hridika. The 
seed of the great ascetic Rishi Varadwaja was 
kept in a pot, and there it began to develope. 
From that seed was born Drona. From 
the seed of Goutara, tallep on a heap of reeds, 
were born a twin, Kripa of great strerigth 
and (Kripi), the motner of Ashwathama ; 
and their was begot mighty Ashwathama 
by Drona. 


108. Then was born, from the sacrificial 
fire. Dhristadyumna, as effulgent as the fire 
itself. 

109. The mighty hero was born, a bow 
in his hand, in order to kill Drona here¬ 
after. From the sacrificial altar was born 
Krishna (Draupadij, resplendent and 
handsome, 

no. A girl of fascinating features and 
great beauty. Then was born the disciples 
of Pralhad, namely Nagnajit and Suvala. 

11 . Suvala begot a son, named Shakuni, 
who through the curse of the celestials, be¬ 
came an enemy of virtue and a destroyer 
of creatures. And (Suvala begot) a daughter, 

112. Who became the mother of Ditryo- 
dhana, and both of them were well versed 
in acquiring worldly profits. From Krishna 
Dwaipayana was born Dhritarashtra, the 
king of men, 

113—114. And Pandu of great strength, 
both in the womb of the wife of Vichitra- 
virja, and from him was also born in the 
womb of a Sudra woman, the wise and in¬ 
telligent Vidura, learned in both Dharma 
and Artha and free from all sins. Five 
sons were born of Pandu 

115. In the wombs of his two wives. 
Yudhishthira was the son of the eldest. 
Yudhishthira was born of Dharma, Brikodara 
Bhima was born of Maruta ; 

116—117. The first of all, the best 
wielder of the arms, illustrious Arjuna was 
born of lndra ; and Nakula and Sahadeva 
of handsome features, ever-engaged in the 
services of their superiors, were born of the 
twin Ashwinis. One hundred sons were 
born to the wise Dhritarashtra, 

118. Namely Duryodhana and others 
and another son, named Yuyutsa (born of 
a Vaisya woman) 

119—120. O descendant of the Bharata 
race, amongst those one hundred sons, 
eleven, namely Dushasana, Dussaha, 
Durmarshana, Vikarna, Chitrasena, Viving- 
sati, Yaya, SatyavTata, PuRuruitra, and 
Yuyutsa of Vaisya wife, were all great car- 
warriors. Abhimanyu was born of buvadra, 

121. The sister of Vasudeva (Krishna), 
begot by Arjuna, and therefore he was the 
grandson of Pandu. Five sons were born to 
the five Pandavas by Draupadi, the daught¬ 
er of Panchala. 

122. These princes were all very hand¬ 
some and learned in all the Shastras 
From Yudhishthira was born Pritivmdhaya, 
from Bhima was born Sutashoma ; 

123 From Arjuna was born Shrutakiriti, 
from Nakula was born Satanika, and from 
Sahadeva was born the greatly powerful 
Srutasena. 

124. Bhima begot a son in the forest on 
Hirimba, named Ghatatkacha. Draupadi 
gave birth to a daughter also, named 
Shikhandini, and she was transformed into 
a male child. 

125—127. She was thus transformed into 
a male child by a Jaksha, named Sthuna, 
who did it from the desire of doing her 
good. In that great battle of Kurus assem¬ 
bled many hundreds of kings and potentates 
to fight among one another.

Janamejaya said-

1. O Brahman, I wish »o hear in detail 
-the accounts of those that you have named 
and of those that you have not named and 
other kings find potentates by thousands. 

2. O great man, you should tell me in 
full the object for which these great car- 
warriors, all equal to the celestials, were 
born on earth. 

Vaishampayana said 

3. O king, we have heard that what you 
ask is a mystery even to the celestials. I 
shall however, speak of it, after bowing tny 
head to the Self-Bom (Brahma). 

4. The son of Jamadagni, (Parashurama), 
after making the earth bereft of 
Kshatriyas for twenty-one times, ; went to the 
best of the mquntains,  Mahendra, 
and began his penance. 

5. O king, when the earth was thus 
bereft of Kshatriyas, the Kshatriya women 
used to come to the Brahmanas for off¬ 
spring. 

6. O best of men, the Brahmanas had 
connections with them only at their seasons, 
and not when they were not in their 
seasons, and they the Brahmans did not 
do it with lust. 

7. thus thousands of Kshatriya women 
conceived through these connections with 
the Brahmanas, and O king, thus were born 
many Kshatriyas of great prowess, 

8,. And many-boys and girls, in order 
to thrive the Kshatriya race. thus sprang 
the Kshatriya race from Kshatriya women 
from their connections with ascetic Brahmanas. 

9. The new generation, blessed with long 
life, began to thrive in virtue, and thus were 
again established the four castes having 
Brahmanas at their head. 

10—11. At the time (of which I speak), 
every man went to his wife only at the time 
of her season and never from lust or when 
she was not at her season. Other creatures 
also,—even those that were born in the 
race of birds,—followed this example. 0 
best of the Bharata race, thus were born 
hundreds and thousands of creatures, and 
they all thrived in virtue. 

12. O lord of the earth, all creatures 
were virtuous and religious, and all men were 
free from sorrow and disease. 

13. O king having the walk of an elephant, 
thus once more was governed by the 
Kshatriya the wide earth, with the ocean 
for her boundaries, with her mountains and 
woods and towns. 

14. When thus was earth again governed 
virtuously by the Khatryas, the other castes, 
having Brahmanas at their head, were filled ( 
with great joy. 

15. All the kings (of the world), becoming free 
from vices born of lust and anger, 
and punishing those that deserved punishment, 
protected the earth.

16. And (Indra) the deity that performed 
one huudred sacrifices and who has one 
thousand eyes, seeing : that all the Kshatriya 
sovereigns ruled their kingdoms very virtuously, 
poured down vivifying showers of 
rains at the proper time and at the proper 
place, and thus protected all creatures. 

17. O king, no one died in early age 
and none took to wife before attaining to 
age. 

18.The best of the Bharata thus was 
filled the earth to the very chores of sea 
with long-lived men. 

iq. The Kshatriyas performed great 
sacrifices and bestqwed much wealth on the 
Brahmanas, and all the Brahmanas also 
studied the Vedas and the Vedangas and 
the Upanishadas. 

20. O king, no Brahmana ever sold the 
Vedas, and none of them ever read them 
aloud before a Sudra. 

21. The Vaisyas tilled well the earth 
with the help of bullocks, and they never 
yoked kine to the plough. They carefully 
fed the lean ones. 


ADI PARVA. 


89 


22% Men never milched the cows as long as 
the calves could only live on the milk of their 
mothers. No merchant sold his goods with 
false scales. 

23. O best of men, all men, thus virtu¬ 
ously inclined, did every thing with their 
eyes fixed on virtue. 

24. O king, all men of all castes were 
mindful of the respective duties of their 
respective castes. O best of men, their virtue 
never sustained any diminution. 

25. Both women and kine gave birth to 
offspring at the proper time, and trees bore 
flowers and fruits at their proper seasons. 

26. O king, the Kriia (Satya) Yitga 
having come into the world, the whole earth 
was billed with numerous creations. 

27. O best of the Bharata race, O lord 
of men, when such was the happy state of 
the world, the Asuras began to take birth in 
royal dynasties. 

28. The sons of Diti, (the Asuras), having 
been continually defeated by the sons of 
Aditi, (the celestials) and deprived of 
sovereignty and heaven, began to take 
birth on earth. 

29—30. O king, wishing to enjoy sove¬ 
reignty in this earth, the powerful Asuras 
took birth among cows, horses, mules, 
camels, buffaloes, elephants, deer ; they also 
took birth as Rakshasas and others. 

31. O protector of the world, owing to the 
birth of those (Asuras) that were already born 
and those that were being born, the Earth 
became incapable of supporting herself. 

32. Amongst the sons of Diti and Danu, 
some, being thrown off from heaven, took 
birth as men, and became proud and inso¬ 
lent monarchs on earth. 

33. Possessed of great prowess, they 
covered the earth in various shapes. They, 
becoming great oppressors, filled the earth 
to the very shores of the sea. 

34. They began to oppress the Brah- 
manas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras; 
they began to persecute all other creatures 
with their strength. 

35. O king, frightening and killing all 
creatures, they roamed over the earth. 

36. Bereft of virtue and truth, proud of 
their strength, intoxicated with their, in¬ 
solence, they even insulted the holy Rfcfhis 
in their hermitages. 

37. O king, the earth, thus oppressed by 

the Asuras of great strength, energy and 
abundant means, thought of appealing to' 
Brahma. . I 

• • 1 

38. The united strength of the Nagaj 
Shesha, and other creatures (such as the 
tortoise and the elephant), could not sup¬ 
port the earth, attacked by the powerful 
Danavas. 

39. O protector of the world, thereupon 
the Earth, afflicted with fear and oppressed by 
the weight (of'the‘Danavas), went to the 
Grandfather of. all creatures arid asked his 
protection. 

40—41. She saw the divine Brahma,— 
the creator of the worlds,—who is undeteri¬ 
orating,—seated (on his seat), surrounded by 
the celestials and great and illustrious 
Rishis, and adored by the delighted Gan- 
dharvas and Apsaras who are always en¬ 
gaged in the services of the celestials. 

42. The Earth adored the Grandsire, and 
O best of the Bharata race, telling him all 
that had happened, before all the regents of 
the world she asked his protection. 

43. O king, the object (for which she 
came) was already known beforehand to 
the Omniscient, Self-created, and Supreme 
Lord. 

44. O descendant of the Bharata’race, he 
is the creator of the universe, why should he 
not know fully what is in the minds of the 
creatures, including the very Devas- and 
the Danavas t 

45. O great king, the Lord of the earth, 
Prajapati, Isha, Shambhu, then thus spoke 
to her. 

Brahma said:— 
46. O Vasundhara (theholderof wealth,) 

I shall appoint all the dwellers of heaven in 
the work, for which you have come to me, 

Vaishampayana said« 

47—48. O king, having thus addressed 
the Earth, the divine Brahma, bade
farewell. Then the Creator commanded aH 
the celestials, saying, all of you, and 
take your hitth on earth to free her from her 
burden. Go according to your respective 
parts and seek battles (with the Danavas). 

49. Then the creator of all the creatures, 
calling all the tribes of the Gandharvas 
and Apsaras, spoke to them thus,” Go all 
of you and take your birth amongst men 
according to your respective gaits and in 
the forms you prefer. 

50. All the celestials-with Indra at their 
head, having heard these words of the lord of 
the celestials,— words that were true; that 
were desirable under the circumstances, and 
which were fraught with benefit, acccpted 
them.  

51. Having then resolved to take birth 
on the earth according to their respective 
parts, they all went to Vaikunta to the 
slayer of foes, Narayana and said-

52. Who bears the discus and the mace 
in his hands, who wears yellow colored cloth, 
who is greatly effulgent, who has the lotus 
on his navel, who is the slayer of the foes of 
the celestials, who is fixedly staring at his 
wide chest, 

53. Who is the lord of the Prajapati 
(Brahma) himself, who is the sovereign of 
all the gods, who is of infinite strength, who 
has the mark of the auspicious wheel on his 
breast, who is the central force of every one’s 
faculties, and who is adored by all the 
dieties; 

54. To him, this most exalted of all persons, 
Indra said, “ Be incarnate.” And Hari 
replied, Be it so.” 

7 huf ends the sixty fourth chapter, Adi - 
vansabatarana, in the Adi Parva . 


Section 64 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.) 

Vaishamapayana said:— 

1, Thereupon, Hari held a consultation 
with Indra regarding his incarnation on 
earth with all the celestials according to 
their respective parts. 

2. Having then ordered the celestials, 
(what they should all do), Indra returned 
from the aoode of Hari (Vaikuntha). 

> 3. The dwellers of heaven then, one after 
the other, took birth on earth for the des¬ 
truction of the Asuras and for the welfare 
of the three worlds. 

’ 4. O best of kings, the celestials, as each 
preferred, took birth in the races of Brah - 
marshis and Rajarshis. 

5. They killed the Danavas, Rakshasas, 
Gandharvas, Nagas and other calibons and 
creatures. 

6. O best of the Bharata race, the Dana¬ 
vas, Rakshasas, Gandharvas and Nagas 
could not kill the (incarnate) celestials, even 
in their infancy, so strong were they. 

Janamejaya said 

7—8. I desire to hear the accounts of 
the births of the Devas, Danavas, Gan¬ 
dharvas, Apsaras, Manavas, Jakshas, and 
Rakshasas from their beginning. therefore, 
you should tell me all about the births of 
creatures. 

Vaishampayana said 

9. Bowing down tny bead to the Self- 
created (Brahma), I shall narrate to you 
in detail the origin of the celestials and of all 
creatures. 


10. Brahma had six mind-born sorts, 
(created out of his mind), namely Marichi 
Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu. 

11. Marichi had a son, named Kashyapa, 
and from Kashyapa have sprung all crea¬ 
tures. Daksha begot thirteen illustrious 
daughters. 

12—13. O best of kings, the daughters, 
of Daksha were Aditi, Did, Danu, Kala, 
Danayu, Sinhika, Krodha, Pradha, Viswa, 
Vinata, Kapila, Muni and Kadru. The 
sons and grandsons of these daughters, all 
of exceeding prowess, were infinite in num¬ 
ber. 

14. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
from Aditi were born the twelve Adityas,— 
who were all lords of the Universe. I shall 
now mention them to you according to 
their names. 

15. (They were) Datha, Mitra, Aryamana, 
Sakra, Varuna, Angsa, Vaga, Vivaswata, 
Pusha, and Savitri, the tenth (daughter). 

16. The eleventh was Tashtri, and the 
twelvth was Vishnu. The youngest, however, 
was the best in merit. 

17. Diti had one son, named Hiranya- 
kashipu, and the illustrious Hiranyakashipu 
had five sons, famous all over the world. 

18. The eldest w is Prahlada, the next 
was Sanghladha, the third was Anuhladha, 
the fourth was Sivi, and the youngest was 
Vashakala. 

19. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
it is known everywhere th it Prahlada had 
three sons, namely Virochana, Kumbha, and 
Nikumbha. 

20. Virochana's son was greatly powerfnl 
Vali, and the son of Vali was the great 
Asura Vana. 

21. He (Vana) was blessed with great 
fortune; he was a follower of Rudra, and was 
also known by the name of Mahakala. 

22—26. O descendant of the Bharata 
race, Danu had forty sons, the eldest of them 
was the famous King Viprachitti. The 
others were Sam vara, Namuchi, Puloma, 
Asiloma, Keshi, Duriaya, Ayasiras, Aswa- 
siras, Aswasanku, Gagan&murdhan, Vega- 
van, Ketuman, Swarbhanu, Aswa, As wa pari, 
Vrishaparva, Ajaka, Aswagriva, Sukshma, 
Tuhunda, Ekapada, EUachakra, Virupaksha, 

, Mahodara, Nichandra, Nikumbha, Kupata, 
Kapata, Sarabha, Salabha, Surya and 
Chandrama. 

27—28. These were the well-known sons 
of Danu. Suria and Chandrama (the sun 
and the moon) of the celestials were other 
persons and they were not the sons of 
Danu. Besides the above, there were ten 
more powerful and great sons of 'Danu, 


ADI PAfcVA. 


9 


namely, Ekaksha, heroic Amritapa, Pralam- 
va, Naraka, 

30. Vatapi, Satrutapana, the great Asura 
Satha, Garistha, Danayu and the Danava, 
named Dirghajihva. 

31. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
the sons and grandsons of the above were 
numberless. Sinhika gave birth to a son, 
called Raho, the persecutor of the sun and 
the moon. 

32. And (she gave birth to) three others, 
namely Suchandra, Chandrahantri and 
Chandrapramardana. The numberless pro- 
gtmy of K rod ha was much wicked as she 
herself was. 

33. Their race was wrathful, of crooked 
deeds, and the persecutors of foes. Danayu 
had four sons, tne best among the Asuras. 

34. (They were) Vikshara, Vala, Vira, 
and the great Asura Vritra. The sons of 
Kala were like Yama himself, all the slayers 
of their enemies. 

35. They were greatly famous and pow¬ 
erful amongst the Danavas and were great 
oppressors of their enemies. 

36. (They were) Vinasana, Krodha, 
Krodhahantri and Krodhasatru. These were 
the sons of Kala. As it is heard, there were 
also many others among the sons of Kala. 
Sukra, the son of a Rishi was the great 
preceptor of all the Asuras. 

37. The illustrious Sukra had four sons 
who were also the preceptors of the Asuras. 
Their names were Tashtadhara and Atri, 
and two others of fearful deeds. 

38—39. They were as effulgent as the 
sun himself. They were always engaged in 
acquiring the regions of Brahma. thus have 
I narrated to you, as I heard them from the 
Purana, the accounts of the progeny of the 
Devas and the Danavas of great strength 
and power. The sons and grandsons, of 
these (Devas and Danavas) were so nuber- 
less that I am incapable of counting them. 

40. O protector of the world, the 
Tarkshya, Arishtanemi, Garuda, Aruni, 

41. And Varuni were known to be the 
sons of Vinata. Shesha or Ananta, Vasuki, 
Takshaka, 

42. Kurma, and Kulika are known to 
be the sons of Kadru. Bhimascna, Ugra- 
sena, Supama, Varuna, 

43. Gopati, Dhritarashtra, Suryavarcha, 
Satyavarcna, Arkapama, Prayuta, 

44. Bhima and Chitraratha, all greatly 
famous, learned and self-controlled, then 
O king, was Shalishira, then fourteenth 
in the least, Paryana, 


45. The Fifteenth, Kali and the six¬ 
teenth Narada;—these Devas and Gan- 
dharvas were known to be the sons of 
Muni. 

46. O descendant of Bharata race, l shall 
now mention many others. Anavadya, 
Manu, Vansa, Asura, Marganapria, 

47. Anri pa, Subhaga and Vasi were the 
daughters of Pradha. Sidhya, Purna, 
Varni, and famous Purnayu, 

48. Brahmachari, Ratiguna and Suparna, 
Vishwavasu, Bhanu, and Suchandra ;— 

49 — 5 °' These Devas and Gandharvas 
were also known to be the progeny of Pradha. 
It is also known that, that lady of good for¬ 
tune Pradha, through the celestial Rishi 
(Kashyapa), brought forth the holy race of 
Apsaras, namely, Alamvusha, Misrakcshi, 
Vidyutaparna, Tilottoma, 

51. Aruna, Rakshita, Rambha, Mono- 
roma, Keshini, Suvahu, Surata, 

52. Suraja and Supria,—these were the 
daughters (of Pradha). And Ativahu, cele¬ 
brated HahaHuhu, and Turmuru. those 
four best of Gandharvas (were also the sons 
of Pradha.) 

53. The Ambrosia, Brahmana, the kine 
the Gandharvas, and Apsaras were the 
offspring of Kapila, so is stated in the 
Purana. 

54. thus have been narrated to you duly 
the births of all the creatures,—and of the 
Gandharvas, Apsaras. 

55. Nagtw, Supamas, Rudras and 
Maruts, of the kine, and of the fortu¬ 
nate and holy Brahmanas. 

56. Tbis history, (if read or heard) ex¬ 
tends the period of life. It is sacredT, k is 
worthy of all praise, it gives pleasure, if 
heard. It should be always heard and 
recited to others in a proper frame of 
mind. 

57. He, who properly reads in the pre¬ 
sence of the deities aad Brahmanas, this ac? 
count of the births of noble creature, obtains 
large progeny, good fortune and fame. He 
attains to the higher worlds hereafter. 

thus ends the sixty-fifth chapter, Sam- 
bhava, in the Adi Parva % 


Section 66

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

I. It is known that the mind-born sons 
of Brama were six great Rishis. There 
was another (mind-born son of Brahma.) 
named Sthanu. He had eleven son gifted 
with great energy, 



mahAUharata. 


n 


2. Namely, Mrigavyadha, Sarpa, famous 
Niriti, Ajaikapata, Ahivardhana, the chas¬ 
tiser of his foes Pinaki. 

3. Dahana, Iswara, and greatly efful¬ 
gent Kapali, Sthanu and the illustrious 
Bhaga. These eleven are called eleven 
Kudras. 

4. (It has been already said that) 
Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
and Kratu, these powerful Rishis were six 
mind-born'sons of Brahma. 

5. It is well-known in the world that the 
sons Jof Anginas were three, namely Vri- 
haspati, Utathya, and Samvarta, all of 
great asceticism. 

6. O king, it is said that the sons of 
Atri were countless; they were all great 
Rishis and they were all learned in the 
Vedas, they were crowned with ascetic 
successes and their souls were in perfect 
peace. 

7. O best of kings, the offspring of 
greatly wise Pulastya were the Rakshasas, 
Monkeys, Kinnaras, and Jakshas. 

8. O king, the offspring of Pulaha were, 
it is said, the Shalavas (the winged-insects) 
the lions, the Ktmpkrushas (half lions and 
half men) tigers, bears and wolves. 

9. The sons of Kratu (Balkhilyas), who 
were as sacred as sacrifice, were the com¬ 
panions of Surja. They were known to the 
three worlds, and they were all devoted to 
truth and vows. 

10. O protector of the world, the illus¬ 
trious Rishi Daksha, having his soul in 
complete peace and possessing great asceti¬ 
cism, sprang from the right toe of Brahma. 

11.  The wife of the illustrious Daksha 
sprang from the left toe of Brahma. He 
then bigot fifty daughters on her. 

12. They were all lotus-eyed and of fault¬ 
less features and limbs. As he (Daksha) 
had no sons of his own, he made these 
daughters his Putrikas . 

13. He (Daksha) bestowed in due form, 
ten of his _daughters on Dharma twenty- 
seven on Chandra, and thirteen on 
Kashyapa. 

14. Hear, O king, the names of the 
wives of Dharma as 1 mention them. 
(They were) Kirtt, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Medha, 
Pushti, Sraddha, Kria, 

15. Budhi, Lajja, and Mati. These were 
the ten wives of Dharma, as appointed by 
the self-created (Brahma). 

• 16. It is known throughout the world 
that the wives of Chandra were twenty- 
seven. They were all of rigid and holy 


vows, they were employed to indicate 
time. 

17. They are the Nakshatras and 
yogonis . They were engaged in assisting 
the course of nature. The Grandsire 
(Brahma) had another son, named Menu. 
Manu had a son, called.Prajapati. 

18. The sons of Prajapati were eight 
and they were called the Vasus. I shall 
name them in detail. (They were) Dhara, 
Dhruva, Soma, Aha, Aniia, Anala, 

19. Pratyusha, and Provasha. These 
are known to be the eight Vasus. Dhara 
and the Brahma-knowing Dhruba were born 
of Dhumra. 

26. Soma and Anita were born of the 
wise Swasa. Aha was the son of Rata, and 
Anala of Sandilya. 

21. Prutyusha and Provasha were the 
sons of Provata. Dhara had two sons, 
namely, Dravina and Hutahavyavaha. 

22. Dhruba's son was the illustrious 
Kala, the destroyer of the world. Soma’s 
son was Varcha, Varcha’s daughter is 
Varchi. 

23. The fascinating Varchi had three 
sons, namely Sishera, Prana, and Uainana. 
The sons of Aha were Jyoti, Shama r 
Shanta and Muni. 

24—25. Agni’s son was the handsome 
Kumara who was born in the forest, and as 
he was reared up by Kirtika and others, he 
was called Kartikeya. After him were 
(born his three brothers, namely) Shakha, 
Vishakha and Naigameya. Anita’s wife was 
Shiva, and her sons were Monojava. 

26. And Avijnatagati. These two were 
the sens of Aniia. Know, Pratyasu's son was 
the Rishi, named Devala. 

27. And Devala had two Sons, both 
greatly wise and forgiving. The sister of 
Vrihaspati, the first of women, the utterer 
of the sacred truth, 

28. And an austere ascetic, roamed over 
the world, having no attraction for the 
world. She (the sister of Vrihaspati) be¬ 
came the wife of the eighth Vasu, Provasa. 

29—30. She gave birth to the illustrious 
Bishwakarma, the founder of all arts, the 
creator of thausand arts, the artist of the 
celestials, the maker of all kinds of orna¬ 
ments, the best of all artists, and the maker 
of the celestial cars of the gods. 

31. Mankind was enabled to live in con¬ 
sequence of the arts of this illustrious man, 
and for this reason he was worshipped by all 
men. This Bishwakarma is everlasting and 
immutable. 



Abft PAkVA. 


93 


32. The illustrious fihnfrite, ttii dispen¬ 
ser of all happiness, came out of the right 
breast of Brahnia, assuming the form of a 
man. 

33. He (Dharma) had three excellent 
sons, charming to all creatures. (They were) 
Sama, Kama, and Harsha, who supported 
the worlds by their energy. 

34. The wife of Kama was Rati, that of 
Shama was Prapti, snd that of Harsha was 
Nanda ; upon these the worlds were made 
to depend. 

35. Kashyapa was the son of Marichi, 
and Kashyapa’s offspring were the Suras 
(celestials) and Asuras. O best of kings, 
therefore, he is the progenitor of all the 
worlds. 

36. Tashtri, who had the form of a mare, 
became the wife of Savita. She gave birth 
in the sky to a twin Ashwinis. 

37. O king, the sons of Aditi were twelve 
with Indra at their head, The youngest 
of the them was Vishnu, upon whom the 
worlds depend. 

38. These were the thirty-three celestials. 
I shall now mention to you their progeny 
according their Pakshas , Kulas , and Ganas. 

39. The Rudras, the Sadhyas, the 
Marutas, the Vasos, the Vargavas, and the 
Viswadevas were each a Paksha . 

40. Vinata’s son, Garuda and the 
Aruna also, and illustrious Vrishaspati were 
counted amongst the Adityas, 

41. The Ashwinis, all annual plants 
and all beasts were counted among the 
Guhyakas . O king, these are the Ganas of 
the celestials, narrated to you. 

42—44. Which narration cleanses men 
of all their sins. The illustrious Brigu 
sprang forth, ripping open the breast of 
Brahma. Brigu’s son was the learned 
Sukra, a poet himself and the son of a 
poet. He, being commanded by the Self- 
created (Brama) to pour rain and withhold 
it, and to dispense and remit calamities, be¬ 
came a planet, and he (still) traverses the sky 
in order to sustain the lives of all creatures 
in the three worlds. That preceptor of 
Yoga philosophy, that greatly intelligent 
man, that wise and self-controlled Brahma - 
chari became the preceptor of the Devas 
and the Danavas. 

45. thus appointed by Brahma to look 
after the well-fare (of Daityas), Brigu’s son 
(Sukra) begot another son, 

46. Named Chyavana, who was greatly 
famous, very virtuous-minded and as efful¬ 
gent as the sun. O descendant of the 
flharata race, he came out of his mother’s 
womb in anger, and thus released his 
mother. 


47. Arushi, the daughter of MartU, be¬ 
came the wife of the wise Chyavana, and 
the greatly illustrious Aurva was born in 
her, ripping open her thighs. 

48. His (Aurva’s) son was Richika, who 
became, even in His boyhoodj very power¬ 
ful, energetic and virtuous. He (Richika) 
begot Jamadagni. 

49. The illustrious Jamadagni had four 
sons, the youngst of them was Parashu- 
rama. He was superior to all his other 
brothers in good qualities. 

50. He was self-controlled but was 
expert in the use of all weapons, and he 
became the destroyer of the Kshatriyas. 
Aurva had one hundred sons, the eldest of 
them being jamadagni. 

51. These hundred sons begot offspring 
by thousands and filled the whole world. 
Brahnia had two other sons, who had 
victory as their signification. 

52. They are known as Dhata and 
Bid hat a , who lived with Manu. Their 
sister is the auspicious Lakshmi who lives in 
the abode of lotuses. 

53. The mind-born sons of Lakshmi are 
the sky-ranging horses. Varuna’s eldest 
wife was the daughter of Sukra, named 
Divi. 

54—55- She gave birth to a son, called 
Vala, and a daughter, named Sura, who 
gives joy to the celestials. And all destroy¬ 
ing Adharma was born (of her), when 
creatures began to devour one another. 
Nriti was his wife, from whom were 
born the Rakshasas, called Nairitas. 

56. She had also three other fearful and 
cruel sons, always engajged in sinful deeds. 
(They were) Vaya, Manavava and Mrityu, 
the destroyer of every created thing. 

57. This all-destroying being (Mrityu) 
had no wife or son. Kaki, Sweni, Bhasi, 
Dhrrtarastra, and Suki,— 

58. These five are known tn the world as 
the daughters of Tamara. Kaki brought 
forth the crows ; Sweni the hawks ; 

59. Bhashi gave birth to the cocks and 
the vultures ; and Dhritarashtra all ducks and 
swans, 

60—61. And she gave birth to also the 
Chakrabakas. The fair and illustrious Suki 
of amiable qualities and auspicious signs 
gave birth to aU parrots. Krodna gave birth 
to nine daughters of wrathful temper. 

62. (They were) Mrigi, Mrigamada, 
Hari, Bhadramana, Matangi, Sarduli, 
Sweta, Suravi, 

63. And the beautiful Surasa of every 
auspicious sign. O best of men, the off- 



94 


MaHAbhArAta. 


spring of Mrigi arc all beasts of deer 
species. 

64. O chastiser of foes, the offspring of 
Mrigamada are all beasts of bear species, 
fend also of those beasts, called Srimara. 
Bhadramina gave birth to her son Airavata. 

65. And Airavata is the great celestial 
elephant. The offspring of Hari are the 
horses and the beasts of the monkey kind 
Which are endued with great activity. 

66 . Those animals that are called Golan - 
gula also are said to be the offspring of 
Hari. Sarduli gave birth to innumerable 
lions and tigers, 

67. And also to leopards and all other 
animals. O king, the offspring of Matangi 
are all elephants. 

68. And Sweta gave birth to the large 
elephant, known by the name of Sweta which 
possesses great speed. O king, Suravi gave 
birth to two daughters, 

69. Namely, the beautiful Rohini and 
illustrious GandharvL O descendant of the 
Bharata race, she had two other daughters, 
named, Vimala and Anala. 

70. All kine were born from Rohini and 
all horses from Gandharvi. And Anala gave 
birth to the seven kinds of trees which pro¬ 
duce pulpy fruits. 

71—72. Anala had another daughter 
named Suki. Surasa gave birth to a son, 
named Kanka. Aruna’s wife Shweni gave 
birth to two very energetic and powerful 
sons, named Sampati and the mighty 

{ atayu. Surasa also gave birth to the 
Jagas and Kadru the Pannyagas. 

73—74. Vinata had two sons, the world 
known Garuda and Aruna. O king of men, 
O best of all wise men, thus have I fully 
described to you the genealogy of all the 
principal creatures. He who hears it is 
cleansed of all his sins. He acquires great 
knowledge, and finally attains to the highest 
state in after-life. 

thus ends the sixty m sixth Section , Sam - 
bhava, in the Adi Parva. 


Section 67

(SAMBHAVA PARVA )—Continued. 

Janamejaya said 

i—2. Worshipful Sir, I desire to hear 
from you in detail the accounts of the births 
and deeds and acheivements among men, 
of the Devas, the Dabavas, the Rakshasas, 
the Gandharvas, the lions, the tigers, the 
snakes, the birds and other animals, and in 
short of all creatures, that became in¬ 
carnate in human forms. 


Vaishampayana said 

3. O king of men, I shall first tell you 
all about those Devas and the Danavas who 
were born amongst men. 

4. The best of the Danavas, who was 
known by the name of Viprachitti, became 
that best of men who is known as Jarasan- 
dha. 

5. O king, that son of Diti, who was 
known by the name of Hiranakashipu, 
became (that king) who was known in tnis 
world by the name of powerful Shishupala. 

6. The younger brother of Prahlada 1 
who was known as Sanghlada, became 
among men that best of Vahlikas, known j 
as famous Sayla. 

7. The youngest (brother of Prahlada) 
known as Anuhlada, became famous 
in this world as Dhristaketu. 

8. O king, that son of Diti who was 
known as Sibi, became the famous monarch 
DRurua on earth. 

9. O best of men, that best of Asuras, 
who was known as Vashkala, became the 
great Vagadatta on earth. 

10. The five powerful and swift Asuras, 
namely Ayasira, Aswasira, Ayaswanku, 
Gaganmurdhana and Vega van, 

11. O king, these powerful great Asuras 
were all born in the illustrious dynasty of 
Kekaya and became great kings. 

12. The mighty Asura, who was known 
as Ketumana, became the king Amitouja 
of terrible deeds. 

13. The great and fortunate Asura, who 
was known as Swarvanu, became the king 
Ugrasena of fearful deeds. 

14 The great and fortunate Asura who 
was known as Aswa, became the invincible 
king Aso)ca of great prowess. 

15. O king, that son of Diti, the younger 
brother of Aswa, who was known as Aswa- 
pati, became the mighty king Hardikya. 

16. The great and fortunate Asura who 
was known as Vishaparvana, became king 
Dhirghaprajna on earth. 

17. O king, the younger brother of 
Vrisaparvana, who was known as Ajaka, 
became Salwa on earth f 

18. The great Asura who was known as 
Aswagriva, became king Rochamana on 
earth. 

19. O king, the intelligent and illustrious 
Asura who was known as Sukshma, became 
the illustrious king Vrihadratha on earth. 

20. That best of Asuras, who was known 
as Tuhandu, became the king Senabindu 
on earth. 



ADI PARVA. 


95 


21. That greatly strong Asura, who was 
known as Ishupa, became king Nagnajita of 
world-known prowess. 

22. The great Asura who was known as 
Ekachakra, became known on earth as 
Pritivindhya. 

23. The great Asura, capable of display¬ 
ing' various modes of fight and known as 
Virupaksha, became known as king Chitra- 
varmana on earth. 

24. That best of Danavas, known as 
the heroic Hara, beeame the famous and 
fortunate king Suvahu on earth. 

25. That Asura of great prowess, the 
chastiser of his foes, known as Suhara, 
became king Vahlika on earth. 

26. That best of Asuras, who was known 
as Nichandra and whose face was as beauti¬ 
ful as the moon, became the fortunate king 
Munjakesha on earth. 

27. That greatly intelligent and invin¬ 
cible Asura, who was known as Nikumbha, 
became the best of kings Divadhipa on 
earth. 

28. That Asura who was known as 
Sarava amongst the sons of Dili, became the 
royal sage Pourava on earth. 

29. O king, that greatly powerful and 
fortunate Asura who was as Kupatha, became 
the famous king Suparsha on earth. 

30. O king, the great Asura who wafc 
known as Kratha, became the royal sage 
Parvateya, as effulgent as a golden 
mountain. 

31. That Asura, who was known as 
Satava the second, became king Prahlada in 
the land of the Valhikas on earth. 

32. That best of the Diti’s sons, who was 
known as Chandra and who was as hand¬ 
some as the lord of the stars (moon), became 
Chandravarmana, the king of Kamvoyas 
on earth. 

33. O king, that best of Danavas, who 
was known as Asha, became the royal sage 
Rishika on earth. 

34. O best of kings, that best of Asuras, 
who was known as Mntapa, became king 
Paschimanupaka on earth. 

35. That greatly powerful Asura, known 
as Garishta, became king DRuruasena on 
earth. 

36. That great and fortunate Asura, who 
was known as Mayura, became king Viswa 
on earth. 

37. That Asura, who was the younger 
brother of May ura and who was known as 
Suparna, became king Kalakiriti on earth. 


38. The greatly powerful Asura, who was 
known as Chandrahantri, became king 
Sunaka on earth. 

39. The great Asura, who was known as 
Chandravinasana, became king Janaki on 
earth. 

40. O king of the Kuru race, that best of 
the Danavas who was known as Dirgajihva, 
became king Kashiraja on earth. 

41. That Asura (Rahu) who was born of 
Sinhika and who persecuted the sun and 
the moon, became king Kratha on earth. 

42. The eldest of the four sons of Danayu, 
who was known as Vikshara, became the 
powerful king Vasumitra on earth. 

43. The second brother of Vikshara, the 
great Asura, became the king of the country 
called Pandya. 

44. That best of Asuras, who was known 
as Valina, became king Pandramatsyaka on 
earth. 

45. O king, that great Asura who Was 
known as Vritra became the royal sage 
Manimala on earth. 

46. That Asura, who was the younger 
brother of Vritra and was known as 
Krodhahantri, became king Danda on 
earth. 

47. That Asura who was known as 
Krodhavardhana beeame king Dandadhara 
on earth. 

48. O best of kings, the eight sons of the 
Asura Kalekyas were all born on earth and 
they all became great kings as powerful as 
tigers. 

49. Of the eight great Kalakeya Asuras, 
the eldest Jayatsena became the king of 
Magadha. 

50. The second, as powerful as Indra, 
became king Aparajita on earth. 

51. The third was a great Asura, endued 
with great prowess and power of deception, 
(Magical powers) and he became the greatly 
powerful king of the Nishadas. 

52. The fourth of . the brothers became 
the best of royal sages, Srenimana. 

53. That great Asura, the fifth (brother) 

became king Mahauja, the oppressor of his 
foes on earth. ; 

544 That greatly intelligent and powerful 
Asura who was the sixth (brother) became 
the best of royal sages Abhiru on- earth. 

55. The seventh of the (brothers) be¬ 
came king Samudrasena, famous all over 
the earth from its centre to the sea and he 
was learned in the Sasttas , 

56. O king, the eighth of the Kalakeyas, 
who was known as Vrihata became a virtu- 



96 


MAHABHARATA. 


ous king, ever engaged in doing good to all 
creatures. 

57. That mighty Danava, who was known 
as Kukshi, became king Parvatya, as 
effulgent as a golden mountain. 

58. That mighty and powerful Asura, 
who was known as Krathana, became king 
Suryaksha on earth. 

59. That handsome Asura, who was 
known as Surya, became on earth that best 
of all kings Darada the king of the Vahlikas. 

60. O king, many heroic monarchs, were 

born on earth from the race of Asuras, 
called Krodhavasha, of. whom 1 have already 
spoken to you. • 

61—66. (They were) Madraka, Kama- 
Veshta, Sidhartha, Kitaka, Suvira, Suvahu, 
Mahavira, Vahlika, Kratha, Vichitra, Sura 
tha, handsome Nila, Chiravasa, Bhumipala, 
Dantavakra, Durjaya, Rukmi, Janame- 
jaya, Ash a da, Vayuvega, Vuriteia, Lkalavya 
Sumitra, Vatadhana, Gomukha, Karushakas, 
Khamdhurti, Srutayau, Udvaha, Vrihat- 
sena, Kshcma, Ugrathirtha. the king of 
Kalinga and Matimana, the king who was 
known as Iswara. 

67. These greatly fortunate, powerful 
and illustrious and best of monarchs were 
all born on earth_of the race of Asuras, called 
Krodhavasa. 

68. That great Danava who was known 
as Kalnemi became the son of Ugrasena, 
king Kansa, on earth. 

69. That Asura who was known as Devaka 
and who was effulgent as Indra himself, 
became the best of the kings of the Gan- 
dharvas on earth. 

70. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
Drona, the son of Varadwaja, who was not 
born of any woman, sprang from the celestial 
Rishi Vrihaspati. 

71. O best of kings, he was a hero of 
great achievements, and the best of all those 
that were learned in the ways of using arms. 
He was most illustrious and most powerful. 

72. He was called learned, in the Vedas, 
as well as in the Science of arms by all men 
well-versed in the Vedas. He was a doer of 
wonderful deeds and a pride of his race. 

73—74. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
O king, his son, the heroic, surpassingly ener¬ 
getic and lotus-eyed Ashwathama, the terror 
of all his foes, and the great oppressor of all 
enemies, was born on earth from the united 
rtions of Mahadeva, Yama, Kama, and 
edha. 

75. Begot by her husband Shantanu, the 
eight Vasus wefe given birth to by Ganga, 
on account of the curse of Rishi Vasishtha 
and also from the command of Indra. 


76. The youngest of them was Bhishma, 
who was the dispeller of the fears of the 
Kurus, who was greatly intelligent, who was 
a great scholar in the Vedas and a best of 
speakers and the destroyer of the enemy’s 
ranks. 

77. That best of men, being learned in 
the science of arms and endued with great 
energy, fought with the illustrious (Purusha) 
Rama, the son of Jamadagni. 

78. O king, that Brahmana Rishi, who 
was known in the world as Kripa, was the 
embodiment of all manliness, was born of 
of the Rudras. 

79. O king, that king and great car- 
warrior, that chastiser of foe, who was 1 
known as Shakuni in the world, know him 

to be the Dwapara himself. 

80. He who was known as Satyaki, the 
upholder of the pride of Vrishnis and the 
chastiser of foes, was born of the portion of 
celestial Marutas. 

81. That royal sag;e, king Drupada, ( 
the best of all the wielder of arms, was 
also born of the portions of the same 
celestials (Marutas). 

82. O king, know that Kritavarma 
that king of men, that man of matchless 
deeds, that best of best Kshatriyas, 

83. That chastiser of foes, was also 
born of the same celestials. The king 
Birata, the conqueror of other kingdoms, 
was also born of the same celestials. 

84. That son of Arishta, known as 
Hansa, the king of the Gandharvas, was 
born to increase the Kuru race. 

85. He was known on earth as Dhrita- 
rastra, the son of Krishna Dawipayana; he 
had long arms, he was greatly powerful, 
and he was asking with prophetic eyes. 

86. He became blind for the fault of his 
mother and anger of the Rishi. His 
younger brother was greatly wrathful and 
strong. He was known as Pandu, and was 
devoted to truth, virtue and purity. 

87. Know, that he who was known as 

Vidura, he who was the best of all virtuous 
men, he who was the god of justice himself, 
was the excellent and greatly fortunate son 
of Atri. • 

88. The evil and wicked-minded king 
Duryodhana, the destroyer of the fame of 
the Kuru dynasty, was born of the portion 
of the Kali. 

89. O king, It was he who was the cause 
of the slaughter of all creatures and of 
the world, he ruined the earth. 

90. It was he who fanned the fire of 
hostility, the great fire of destruction. The 



ADI PARVA. 


97 


sons of Pulustya became on earth the 
brothers of Duryodhana. 

91. They were one hundred,—Dush- 
yashana Durmuka, Dushaha and others, all 
wicked to the extreme. I do not mention 
their names. 

92. All of them supported Duryodhana 
in his wicked acts. O best of the Bharata 
race, they were all sons of Pulastya 
(Rakshas). Over and above these one hun¬ 
dred sons, Dhritarashtra had another son, 
begot on a Vaisya woman. 

Janamejaya said 

93. O Lord, tell me the names of all the 
sons of Dhritarashtra begining from the 
eldest, according to the order of their 
births. 

Vaishampayana said 

94—106. (They are) Durjodhana, Yuyutsa, 
Dushashana, Dussaha, Dash ala, Durmukha, 
Vivingsati, Vikarna, Jalasandha, Sulachana, 
Vinda, Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Suvahu, 
Dushdadharshaha, Durmarshena, Durmu¬ 
kha, Dushkarma, Kama, Chitra, Upachitra, 
Chitraksha, Cham, Chitrangada, Dur- 
mada, Dushpraharsha, Vivitsu, Vikata, 
Sama, Urnanava, Padmanava, Nanda, 
Upanandaka, Senapati, Shusena, Kundo- 
dara, Mahdara, Chitravahu, Chitravar- 
mana, Suvarmana, Durvilashana, Ayavahu, 
Mahavahu, Chitrachapa, Sukundala, Vhi- 
mavega, Bhimavala, Valaki, Valavarhdana, 
Ugravudha, Bhimashara, Kanakaya, 

Dredhyudha, Dhridavarmana, Dredha, 

Khatra, Somakriti, Anadara, Jarasandha, 
Dridhasandha, Satyasandha, Sahasravaka, 
Ugrasrava, Ugrasena, Kshemamurti, 

Aparajita, Panditaka, Vishalaksha, Duru- 
dhara, Dridhahasta, Subasta, Vataviga, 
Suvarchasta, Adityaketu, Vahvasen, Naga- 
datta, Aunvaina, Nishangi, Kavachi, 
Dandi, Dandadhara, Dhaungraha, Ugra, 
Bhimaratha, Vira, Virabahu, Alolupa, 

Abhoya, Rudra, Karma, Dhridaratna, 
Anadhershya, Kundavida, Viravi, Dhirgo- 
lochana, Dtrguvahu, Mahavahu, Vyndhom, 
Kanakardoya, Kendoja and Chitraka. He 
(Dhritarashtra) had also a daughter, named 
Dushala, above and over these one hundred 
sons. Dhritarashtra had another son, named 
Yuyutsa, born of a Vyasa woman, who was 
also above and over these one hundreds. 

107. O king, thus have I told you the 
names of the one hundred sons (of Dhri¬ 
tarastra), and also of die name of his daugh¬ 
ter. You have now known their names ac¬ 
cording to the orders of their births. 

108. They were all heroes, great car- 
warriors and learned m the use of arms. 
They were also well-versed in the Vedas, 
and experts in statesmanship, 


109. O king, all of them were mighty 
in attack and defence, and all of them were 
learned. They married wives suitable to 
them in beauty and accomplishments. 

no. At the marriageable age, the king 
of the Kurus at the advice of Shakuni bes¬ 
towed his daughter Dushala on Jaya- 
dhrata, the king of the Sindhus. 

in. Know, O king, king Yudhishthira 
was a portion of Dharma; Bhifna was 
that of Maruta; Arjuna was that of 
the king of the celestiafs (Indra), 

112. The most handsome men amongst 
all men and the matchless beauties on earth, 
Nakula and Sahadeva were the portions 
of the Ashwinas. 

113. He, who was known as Varcha, the 
son of Soma, became Abhimanyu of wonder¬ 
ful deeds, the son of Arjuna. 

114. O king, before his (Varcha) in¬ 
carnation on earth, Soma thus spoke to the 
celestials, “I cannot part with my son ; he is 
dearer to me than life. 

115. Let this agreement be made, and 
let not that agreement be violated. The 
destruction of the Asuras is the work 
of the celestials, therefore it is our work 
also. 

116. Let this Varch go, but let him 
not stay long on earth. Nara will born as 
Indra’s son, and he will have Narayana as 
his friend. 

117. He will be known on earth as power¬ 
ful Arjuna, the son of Pandu. My boy will 
be his son, and even in his boyhood will be a 
great car-warrior. 

118. O best of immortals, let him remain 
on earth only for sixteen years. On his 
sixteenth year, will take place that great 
fight, 

119. In which your incarnations will kill 
innumerable heroes. And in the fight in 
which Nara and Narayana (Arjuna and 
Krishna) will not be present, 

120. And in which, O celestials, the 
(Kuru) heroes will fight with constructing a 
Chakrabuha , (in that fight) my son will defeat 
all foes and compel them to retreat. 

121. The boy will enter into that impe¬ 
netrable Buha and will walk about the 
place. He will defeat and kill many heroes 
and great car-warriors. 

122. The mighty-armed hero, within the 
course of half a day, will send the one - 
fourth part of the foes, to the land of 
the dead. 

123. Then towards the close of the day, 
many heroes and great car-wanriers will 
return to the charge and attack my son. 
Therenpon, my mighty-armed son will come 
back to me 


13 



98 


MAHABHARATA. 


124. He will beget one heroic son who 
will keep alive the almost extinct Bharata 
dynasty.” 

125. Having heard these words of Soma, 
the celestials said, “Be it so.” They then 
all worshipped and praised the lord of the 
stars (Soma). 

126. O king, thus have I told you the 
accounts of the births of your father and 
his father (and so on). Know, O king, 
the great car-warrior Dristadyumna was 
born of a portion of Agni. 

127 Know that Shikhandi, who was 
previously a woman, was born of a portion 
of a Rakshasa. O best of the Bharata race, 
those that became the five sons of Drau- 
padi, 

128. Know, O best of the Bharata 
race, were the celestials, called Vasus. 
(They were) Pritivindhyas, Sutasoma, Sru- 
takinti. 

129. Satanika, the son of Nakula, and 
the powerful Srutasena. The best of the 
Yudus, Sura, became the father of Vasu- 
deva. 

130—132. His daughter was named 
Pritha, who was matchless on earth in 
beauty. Her father (Sura) promised 
before Fire that he would give his first-born 
child to the son of his paternal aunt, king 
Kuntibhoja, who was childless. He gave 
his daughter (Pritha) to that king, expecting 
to get his favour. And king Kuntibhoja, 
adopted her as his daughter. She was 
engaged in her (foster) father’s house in 
attending upon Brahmanas and guests. 

133—134 One day she attended upon 
the terrible and wrathful ascetic, vow-obser- 
ing Durvasa, who was learned in the mys¬ 
teries of religion and well-acquainted with 
truth. She, with all possible care, gratified 
that self-controlled ascetic. 

135. The illustrious man said, 4  O for¬ 
tunate girl, I am much pleased with you. 
To those of the celestials whom you will 
call by this Mantra (that 1 teach you), 

136. (They will instantly coroe), and 
by their grace you will give birth to off¬ 
spring.” thus addressed, that girl, bring 
Aioch curious (to see the effect of the 
Mantra), 

I3f. Called Surya when she was a maid. 
The illustrious god of light (Surya) made 
her conceive; 

138. And she begot a son. who became 
the best of all wielders of arms. He was 
bora with a coat of arms and a pair of 
earrings, and he looked as handsome 

139. And as effulgent as the sun, and 
every part of his body was well embellished. 
From the fear of her friends and relatives, 
privately 

140. Did she throw that illustrious son 
into water (river). But the child, thus thrown 
into the water, was taken up by the illustri¬ 
ous husband of Radha. 

141—142. Adhiratha (the husband of 
Radha) made the child his son. And 
the couple then gave him the name of 
Vasushena, by which name he soon became 
known all over the country. As he grew up, 
he became very strong and excelled in the 
use of all weapons. 

143. He became the best victor, and 
learned in all the Vedangas. When that 
wise and truth-loving man studied the 
Vedas, 

144. Then there was nothing to that high- 
soul ed man which he could not give to 
the Brahmanas. To do good to his son 
(Arjuna), illustrious Indra, one day—assum, 
ing the form cf a Brahmana, 

145. Begged from him his ear-rings and 
his natural coat of arms. Removing the 
earrings and coat of arms from his ear and 
breast, 

146. He gave it to Indra, who being 
much surprised (for his liberality), presented 
him with a dart and spoke to him thus, 
“The Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, 
Rakshasas, Uragas or men, 

147. At whomever, O hero, you will hurt 
this weapon, he will certainly be killed.” 
He (the son of Pritha) was previously known 
by the name of Vasushena, 

148. But for his mighty deeds, he was 
subsequently called Karna. Because the 
greatly illustrious hero removed his natural 
coat of arms (from his breast) 

149. He, the eldest son of Pritha, was 
called Karna . O best of kings, he thus 
began to grow up in the Suta caste. 

150. Karna, the best of kings, expert in 
-the use of all arms, the distroyer of his foes, 
became the friend and counsellor c£ 
Duryodhana, 

151. Know, O king, he was born of  
portion of the sun. Of that god of gads, 
that everlasting Being, whose name » 
Narayana, 

152. The powerful Vasudeva (Krishna) 
was a portion m the world of men. Bala- 
deva was a portion of the Naga, Shesha. 

153. O king, know that the greatly ener- 
, getic Pradyumna was a portion of Sana' 

1 kumara. In this way many dwellers of heaven 
b ec a me great men on earth. 



ADI PARVA. 99 


154. In the race of Vasudeva, thus 
increasing its glory. O king, the Apsaras, 
of whom I have already spoken 

155. Was also born on earth in portions 
ordered by Indra. O king, sixteen 

thousand portions of these celestial ladies, 

156. Became in the world of men the 
wives of Vasudeva. A portion of Sree 
(Lakshmi) herself became incarnate on earth 
out of love (for Narayana). 

157—158. She was born in the race of 
Vishwaka, and that illustrious lady was 
named Rukmini. Draupadi was born from 
-a portion of Sachi, (the wife of Indra) in 
the race of Drupada and from the altar of 
the sacrifice. She was neither tall nor short, 
she had the fragrance of blue lotus, 

159. Her eyes were like the lotus leaves, 
her thighs were fair and round, and her dense 
masses of hair were black and curly. She 
was endued with all auspicious marks and 
her complexion was like tne emerald. 

160. She was the charmer of the hearts 
of the five kings of men (the Pandavas.) The 
goddesses Sidhi and Dhriti became the 
mothers of the five (Pandavas). 

161—162. They were named Kunti and 
Madri. And the goddess, who was Mati, 
became the daughter of Suvala (Gandhari, 
the wife of Dhritarashtra). thus, O king, 
have X described to you the births and 
incarnations of the portions of the Devas, 
Asuras, Gandharvas, Apsaras and Raksha- 
sas, those that appeared on earth as in¬ 
vincible kings. 

163. Those illustrious ones that were 
born in the extensive race of the Yadus, those 
that were born as Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, 
and,Vaisyas, have all been described. 

164. This Vansabhatarana (accounts of 
incarnations,) which is capable of bestowing 
wealth, fame, long-life, offspring, and vic¬ 
tory, should be heard with proper frame of 

(Bind. 

165. Hearing the incarnations of the 
Devas, the Asuras and the Gandharvas, the 
teamed men, thus knowing the mystery of 
creation, preservation and destruction, do 
not feel depressed, even in- the greatest 
sorrow. 

thus ends the sixty seventh Section , 
Sambhaba, in the Adi Parva . 


Section 68

(SAM BH A B A).— Continued 

Janamejaya said 

I. O Brahmana I have heard in detail 
the account of the births of the Devas, the 


Danavas, the Rakshasas, the Gandharvas 
and the Apsaras. 

2. I now desire to hear the accounts of 
the births of the kings of the Kuru race front 
the beginning. therefore, O Brahmana, 
narrate them before all these Brahmana 
Rishis. 

Vaishampayana said 

3. O best of the Bharata race, the 
founder of the Paurava dynasty was a greatly 
powerful king, named Dusmanta. He was 
the protector of the earth bounded by the 
four seas. 

4. That king of men enjoyed the fourth 
part of all the products of the land. He 
was (also) the lord of various countries in the 
midst of the sea. 

5. That chastiser of foes had sway even 
over the countries of the Mlechas, which was 
full of men of the four orders, and which 
was surrounded by the sea, the mine of 
gems. 

6. During his reign, there were no mixed 
castes, no tillers of the land, no toilers of the 
mines, and no sinful men. 

7. O best of men, during his reign, all 
men were virtuous, and they did every 
thing with an eye on virtue. 

8. O child, during his reign, there was 
no fear from the thieves and no fear from 
famines; and there was no fear of diseases. 

9. Men of all the four castes took 
pteasure in doing their respective duties, and 
they performed all acts without the desire 
of gaining fruits. O protector of the world, 
depending upon him, his subjects felt no 
fear. 

10. Prajanya (Indra) poured showers of 
rains at theproper time, and the crops were 
all juicy. The earth was full of all kinds 
of wealth and animals ; 

11. The Brahmanas were always en¬ 
gaged in their duties, and they were very 
truthful. He (Dusmanta) was a young 
prince of wonderful prowess and of a body 
like the thunder-bolt. 

12. He could support the Mandara 
(mountain) with its woods and forests 
raising it up on his arms. He was an 
expert in the four kinds of club-fight, and 
also in using every kind of weapons. 

13. He was greatly expert in riding 
elephants and horses. In strength, he was 
like Vishnu and In Splendour he was like 
the sun. 

14. In gravity he was tike the ocean, and 
in patience he was like the earth. The king 
(Dusmanta) was loved by all his subjects 
and lie too ruled very virtuously those con¬ 
tented men. 

thus ends the ' sixty-eighth Section , 
Sambhava, in the Adi Parva . 


Section 69

(SAMBHAVA).— Continued. •  

Janamejaya said 

1. I desire to hear in detail the account 
of the birth and career of the high-souled 
Bharata and the origin of Shakuntala. 

2. O holy man, tell me in full how that 
hero, that lion among men, obtained Sakun¬ 
tala. 1 desire to hear it, therefore O knower 
of truth, you should narrate it to me. 

Vaishampayana said •— 

3. Once on a time that king (Dusmanta) 
of mighty arms, accompanied with a very 
large force with hundreds of horses and 
elephants, went into a dense forest. 

4. The force were of four kinds (infantry 
cavalry, elephant-men and car-warriors) and 
the men were armed with swords, darts, 
maces and big clubs. 

5. Surrounded by hundreds of warriors 
with lances and spears in their hands, the 
king marched out. The lion-like roars of 
the warriors, the sounds of conches and 
dRurus, 

6. The rattle of the wheels of the cars, 
the shrieks of the huge elephants, and the 
clash of weapons of various soldiers 
dressed in various dresses, 

7. And the neighing of horses, all these in¬ 
distinct, sounds, mixing together, raised a 
deafening (Kil Kil) sound when the king 
was on the march. 

8. Beautiful ladies from the terraces of 
the magnificient mansions beheld the heroic, 
illustrious and kingly monarch (to pass). 

9. They knew that king to be the 
destroyer of foes like Indra; they thought 
him to be the wielder of thunder-bolt him¬ 
self. 

10. They said, “This is that best of 
heroic men who is as powerful in the battle as 
the Vasu. All enemies are destroyed by his 
great prowess.' 

11. Having said this, the ladies, out of 
love towards nim, showered flowers on the 
head of the king to his great gratifi¬ 
cation. 

12. Having been blessed by the best of 
Brahmanas everewhere on the way, the 
king entered the forest with the eager desire 
of killing deer. 


13. The king, seated on the back of a 
mad elephant, looked like the king of the 
celestials, and he was followed by Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. They 
uttered blessings and cried victory from all 
sides. 

14. The citizens and other people also 
followed the king for some distance. 

IS—16. They stopped from going further 
only at the command of the king. There¬ 
upon, the king of the world got upon his 
car with the color of gold ana filled the 
whole world, even the heavens, with the rattle 
of his car-wheels. thus proceeding he saw a 
forest like the Nandana wood of heaven. 

17. It abounded in Vtlwa, Arka t Khadira 
Kopithwa , and Dhava trees; its soil was 
uneven and covered with blocks of stone, 
loosened from the hills. 

18. There were no water and human ha¬ 
bitations ; it extended to many Yoyanas . It 
was full of deer, lions and other fearful ani¬ 
mals of the forest. 

19. That best of kings, Dusmanta, with 
the help of his soldiers and servants, beat 
the forest, thus killing many deer. 

20. Dusmanta pierced with his arrows 
many tigers that were within shooting range 
and killed them (by hundreds). 

21. The king wounded many by arrows 
(that were out of the shooting range and 
not to be killed by swordi) ; he killed by 
his sword those that were near at hand. 

22. That best of the wielders of darts, 
killed many by hurling his darts at them. 
The greatly expert player of clubs, the king 
of matchless prowess (Dusmanta), thus 
fearlessly roamed over the forest. 

23. The king, as he roamed abott, 
killed many beasts of the forest with his 
swords, ana some by his swift flying darts, 
and some by his heavy clubs. 

24. When the forest was thus agitated 
by the wonderfully powerful king and his 
soldiers, ever delighting in warlike sports, 
the lions left in thousands that forest. 

25. Having thus lost their kings, the other 
beasts uttered loud cries in fear and anxiety, 
and fled in all directions. 

26—27. They fell down on all sides, being 
hungry, thirsty, and tired of running, ana 
without being able to quench their thirst in 
the river-beds which were dry. Some of them 
were eaten up by those best of warriors ; 

28. Some were quartered and roasted 
in fires lit up by them,- and then they were 7 
eaten by the warriors in the proper way. 

29. Many strong elephants, maddened ' 
with the pains of their wounds, fled in fear 
with their trunks upraised on high. 


30. Those wild elephants, ejecting urine 
and dung in fear, and copiously vomitting 
blood, trampled to death many soldiers (of 
the king). 

31. The forest, which had been full of 
animals, was soon made by the king and his 
innumerable followers, bereft of lions and 
tigers and other beasts. 

thus ends the sixty ninth chapter, 
Sambhava , in the Adi Parva . 


Section 70

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said : — 

1. The king with his soldiers, having 
killed thousands of animals, entered 
another forest to hunt in it. 

2. Fatigued with hunger and thirst, and 
accompanied by only one follower, he came 
to a large desert at the end of the forest. 

3. Having passed over this herbless 
desert, the king came to a forest full of 
holy hermitages. It was beautiful to the 
eyes and delightful to the heart. 

4— 5 « It was cool, and it breathed delight¬ 
ful breeze. It was full of trees covered 
with flowers. It extended far and wide in 
green soft grass. It echoed with the sweet 
songs of the birds. It resounded with the 
sweet notes of the male kokila and the shril 
cries of cicalas . 

6 . It contained magnificent trees with¬ 
out-stretched branches, which had formed 
pleasant shady canopies. The bees hovered 
over the flowery creepers, and beautiful 
groves were every where. 

7. There was no tree without fruits ; 
there was no shrubs with prickles on them ; 
there was no plant that had not bees swar- 
arming around it. 

8 . The whole forest resounded with the 
sweet songs of the birds ; and it was decked 
with all the beautiful flowers of all the sea¬ 
sons. It was full of pleasant shades of 
blossoming trees. 

9. Such was the charming and excellent 
forest that the great bow-man (Dusmanta) 
entered. The trees, decked with flowers 
and waved with the soft breeze, 

10. Showered sweet flowers, again and 
again, on the head of the king. 

11. —12. Clad with the flowery attire of 
many colours,—the sweet singing birds sit¬ 
ting on their branches hanging with the 
weight of flowers,—the busy bees temp¬ 
ted by honey buzzing in sweet chorus 
around their blossoms, stood many trees (in 
that forest). There were innumerable bowers 
of creepers covered with thick clusters of 
flowers. The greatly energetic king was 
much pleased and charmed with the scenery. 

14. The trees, with its-floweiy branches, 
entwining with one another, looked exceed¬ 
ingly beautiful and appeared like so many 
rainbows.

15. It was the abode of the the
Charanas , the various sorts of Gandharvas
the Apsaras, the monkeys and the Kinnaras
—all drunk with joy. 

16. Pleasant, cool and fragrant breezes, 
mixed with the effluvia of sweet flowers, 
blew every where, and appeared as if they 
had come there to play with the trees. 

.17. The king saw that forest endued 
with such beauties. It was situated in the 
delta of a river, and looked like a pole 
erected in Indra’s honour. 

18. The king saw in that forest,—the 
abode of ever cheerful birds,—a charming 
and delightful hermitage of ascetics. 

19. It was surrounded by many trees, 
and the holy fire was burning within it. He 
(the king) worshipped that matchless her¬ 
mitage. 

20. He saw innumerable Yotees, Val- 
khilyas and other Munis sitting there (in 
that hermitage). It was adorned with rooms 
containing the sacrificial fire. The flowers, 
dropping from the trees, had made a beau¬ 
tiful carpet on the ground. 

21. The place looked very beautiful with 
the tall trees with their large trunks. O king, 
the transparent and sacred river Malini 
flowed by it. 

22. The river was charming to the as¬ 
cetics and abounded with every species of 
water-fowls. He (the king) was much de¬ 
lighted to see the innocent deer-cubs play¬ 
ing (playfully) on her banks. 

23. Thereupon, the king, whose chariot 
no foe could obstruct, entered that charm¬ 
ing hermitage, exceedingly beautiful all 
over, and which was like the region of 
heaven. 

24. He saw that the hermitage was 
situated on the banks of the river,—a most 
sacred one, and she flowed as the mother 
of all the creatures living there. 

25. Milk-white waves played on her 
breast. Chakravakas sported on her banks. 
It was the abode of the Kinnaras, and it 
was frequented by the monkeys and the 
bears, 

26. The holy ascetics, engaged in study 
and meditation, lived there on the beautiful 
banks of that river. It was frequented by 
the intoxicated elephants, tigers and great 
snakes, 

27. On the banks of the river, 
stood the excellent hermitage 
of the illustrious Rishi (descendant of) 
Kashyapa, frequented by many great ascetic 
Rishis.

28. He came by the river and the hermitage, 
and into that sacred place. 

29. The river was studded with many 
beautiful and charming shores. 
It looked like the abode of Nara and 
Narayana, laved by the waters of the 
Ganges. 

30. The best of men then entered that 
hermitage, which was resounding with the 
notes of the intoxicated pea-cocks, and 
which appeared like the gardens of Chitra- 
ratha (Gandharva). 

31. He desired to see the great ascetic 
Rishi, the illustrious Kanwa, the son of 
Kashyapa, the possessor of all virtues, and 
who was too effulgent to be stared at. 

32. Halting his army of flag-holders, 
cavaliy, infantry and elephants at the out- 
skirt of the forest, the king spoke to the 
soldiers thus, 

33. u I shall go to see the mighty ascetic, 
the son of Kashyapa, who is beyond the 
Raja guna. Stay here till I return.” 

34. The king forgot his hunger and 
thirst and derived infinite pleasure as soon 
as he entered that forest, like Nandana, 
(the garden of Indra.) 

35. The king, having laid aside all signs 
of royalty, entered that excellent hermitage 
with nis Minister and Priest only. 

36. He desired to see that Rishi who was 
an indestructible mass of ascetic merit. 
He saw that the hermitage was like the 
region of Brahma. 

37. Bees were Sweetly buzzing and birds 
were pouring forth their melodies. That 
best of men heard in one place the chanting 
of the Rig Vedas with the proper intonation 
by the best of Brahmanas. 

38. In another place, (he saw) Brah¬ 
manas, learned in. the Vedangas, reciting 
the hymns of Yuyur Veda. In another 
place, the Rishis of regid vows were 
reciting Saman hymns in harmonious 
strains. 


39—41. In another place, he saw 
Brahmanas, learned in the Atharva Veda, 
reciting the Sanhitas according to the 
proper rules of voice. At other places, 
Brahmanas, learned in the science of or¬ 
thoepy, were reciting' Mantras of other 
kinds. That holy hermitage, resounding 
with these holy sounds, did really look like 
the region of Brahma. 


42. There were many Brahmanas who 
were experts in the art of making sacri¬ 
ficial platforms and in the rules of Krama 
in sacrifice. There were many other learned 
in Naya, (Logic) and mental sciences; and 
many having complete knowledge of the 
Vedas. 


43. There were those that were learned 
in the meanings of every kind of expres¬ 
sions, those that were experts in perform¬ 
ing special rites, those that knew the Mokk~ 
shadharma , 

44. Those that were well-versed in estab¬ 
lishing propositions, rejecting superfluous 
causes and drawing right conclusions, 
those that were learned in the science of 
words, of prosody, and of Nirukta, those 
that were learned in the science of Time 
(Astrology), 

45. In the properties of matter, in the 
fruits of sacrificial rites, those that possessed 
a knowledge of causes and effects, those that 
understood the languages ,of monkeys and 
birds,and those that were well-read in all 
large treatises. 

46. And various Shastras. The king, as 
he proceeded, heard their incantations and 
chantings, which were capable of charming 
all human hearts. 

47. The destroyer of the enemy's army, 
(Dushyanta), saw around him innumerable 
learned Brahmanas of regid vows who were 
all engaged i njopa and homa. 

48. The king was much astonished to 
see the beautiful carpets which these Brah¬ 
manas offered him (for his seat.) 

49. That best of kings, seeing the rites 
with which the Brahmanas worshipped the 
deities, thought himself in the land of 
Brahma. 

50—51. The more the king saw that aus- 

B is and sacred hermitage of the son of 
yapa (Kanwa), protected by that Rishi’s 
ascetic virtues and endued with all the 
requisites of a holy retreat, more he desired 
to see it. He was not satisfied with this 
cursory view (of the beautiful hermitage). 
The destroyer of foes, accompanied by his 
Minister and his Priest, then entered that 
charming and sacred hermitage of the son 
of Kashyapa, inhabited by the great ascetic 
Rishis of regid vows. 

thus ends the seventieth Section , Sai m 
bhava , in the Adi Parva . 



ADI PARVA. 


103 


Section 71 

(SAMBHABA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaisampay&na said 

1. Having proceeded Further, leaving 
behind him all his attendants that mighty, 
armed king entered the hermitage, alone 
but he did not find there the Rishi of regid 
vows, (Kanwa.) 

2. Having seen that the Rishi's hermit¬ 
age was empty, he hailed aloud, 44 Ho, who 
is here ?' And his voice was echoed in the 
forest. 

3. Hearing his voice, a maiden, in the 
garb of ascetics, as beautiful as Sree 
(Lakshmi), came out of the hermitage. 

4. No sooner that black-eyed damsel 
saw the king Dushyanta, than she instantly 
bade him welcome, and worshipped him in 
due form. 

5. She respected him with offering a seat, 
she gave him water to wash his feet, and she 
then offered him the argha Having done 
all this, O king, she then enquired after his 
health and peace. 

6. Having thus honoured him in due 
form and enquired about his health and 
peace, the maiden most respectfully asked 
the king, 44 What should be done?" 

7. Having been thus honoured in due 
form, the king replied to that sweet-Speeched 
and fauldess featured damsel thus, 

8. 44 1 have come to worship the greatly 
blessed Rishi Kanwa. O amiable and beau¬ 
tiful lady, tell me where has the illustrious 
man gone?" 

Sakontala said 

9. My noble father has gone away from 
the hermitage to collect fruits. Kindly wait 
for a moment, and you. will see him when 
he will come. 

Vaishampayana said 

10. The king, having not seen the Rishi 
and having been thus addressed by the 
maiden, saw that she was exceedingly beau¬ 
tiful, she was an exquis : te beauty of sweet- 
smiles, and a lady of perfect symmetry of 
shape. 

11. She was in the bloom of her youth 
and beauty; she was adorned with the 
beauty of faultless features, hard asceticism, 
and sweet humility. The king addressed 
her thus,— 

12. 44 Who are"you ? O boautiful lady, 
whose daughter are you ? Why have you 
come into this forest ? O beautiful lady, 
accomplished and beautiful as you are, 
whence have you come here ?" 


13. O charming lady, you have stoleo 
my heart at the very first glance. I desire 
to learn all about you. O beautiful lady, 
tell me all." 

14. Having been thus addressed by the 
king in that hermitage, the maiden smilingly 
replied to him in sweet words, 

15. 41 O (king) Dusmanta, I am the 
daughrer of the illustrious, virtuous, wise, 
and high-souled ascetic Kanwa. 

Dushyanta said 

16. The illustrious and highly blessed 
Rishi is worshiped by all the world. He has 
completely controlled his sexual passions. 
Even Dharma may fall from the rignt path, 
but an ascetic of regid vows can never fall 
from it. 

17. O beautiful and charming lady r 
how can you be his daughter ? You should 
dispel from my mind this great doubt of 
mine, 

Shakuntala said 

18. O king, hear what I have learnt 
(from the Rishi), regarding all that happened 
to me, and how I became the daughter of the 
Rishi (Kanwa). 

19. Once on a time, a Rishi came here 
and asked about my birth. O king, hear, 
what the illustrious Rishi (Kanwa) told him 
about me. 

Kanwa said 

20. Vishwamitra of old were engaged in 
austere asceticism, and he thus alarmed 
Indra, the king of the celestials. 

21. He (Indra) thought that the Rishi 
by his great ascetic penances would hurl 
him from his high seat in heaven. Being 
thus alarmed, he callded Men aka and told 
her, 

22. 4t O Menaka, you are the best of alt 
celestial Apsaras. O amiable gjrl, do me 
this service, Listen to what I say. 

23. The great ascetic Vishwamitra, as. 
effulgent as the som, is now engaged in 
great asceticism, and therefore my heart is 
trembling. 

24. O Menaka, O slender-waisted girl, 
it is your business. You must see Vishwa¬ 
mitra, whose soul is rapt in contemplation 
and who is deeply engaged in the austere 
penances. 

25. He may displace me from my 
(high) seat (in heaven). Go and tempt him. 
Frustrating his asceticism, do my good. 

26. O beautiful girl, win him from his 
asceticism, by tempting him with your 
beauty, youth, agreeabteness, arts, smiles 
and speech. 
Menaka said 

27. That illustrious Rishi, is a great as¬ 
cetic and is greatly effulgent ; your illustri¬ 
ous self knows also that he is very wrathful. 

28. The energy, the asceticism and the 
wrath of that illustrious man have made 
even you anxious Why shonld I not be 
afraid of him ? 

29. He made even the illustrious Vasista 
to suffer the grief of the premature death of 
his sons. He was originally a Kshatriya, 
but has become a Branmana by his own 
strength (of asceticism) 

30. He created a deep river of strong 
currents for the purposes of ablutions. 
That holy river is still known in the world 
by the name of Kousika. 

31. Here (on the banks of this river) 
the wife (of this illustrious man) was main¬ 
tained during a famine by the royal sage 
Matangi, who was living there as a hunter 
(under a curse) 

32. O Lord, this illustrious man, after 
the famine was over, came back to his 
hermitage and gave the river the name of 
Para . 

33. Being very much pleased with Ma¬ 
tangi, this illustrious man became his priest 
for the purposes of sacrifice. O king of the 
celestials, out of fear you yourself went to 
that sacrifice to drink the Soma. 

34. This illustrious man created in anger 
another world with 9 tars; he created nu¬ 
merous other stars, beginning from Sravana. 
This illustrious man gave protection to Tri- 
sanka, cursed by his preceptor. 

35. I am afraid to go to a man whose 
deeds are such. O Lord, ordain that which 
may prevent him from burning me in anger. 

36. He can bum the worlds with his 
effulgence; he can make the earth auake 
by a Itick ; he can uproot the great Mem 
(mountain) and hurl It to a great distance, 
and go round the ten points of the earth 
in a moment. 


37. How can a woman (like my humble 
self) touch such a man who is full of ascetic 
virtues, who is as blazing as the blazing 
fire, and who has completely controlled his 
passions. 

38. His mouth is as blazing as the fire, 
the pupils of his eyes are like the sun and 
the moon, and his tongue is like Yama him¬ 
self. O best of the celestials, how can 
women like ourselves touch him ? 


Saclhyas, the Vishwas, tfie Valikhilyas, all 
are alarmed at the thought of his prowess. 


Why should not a woman (like myself) be 
afraid of him ? 


40. O king of the celestials, commanded 
by you somehow or other I must go to that 
Rishi. But, O king of the celestials, devise 
some means by which, under your protec¬ 
tion, I can safely move about him. 


41. O celestial, when I shall be near 
the Rishi, Maruta (wind) should be there, 
and rob me of my cloth. Manmatha 
(the god of love) should at your command 
help me in my this work. 

42. Let the wind carry sweet fra¬ 
grance from the wood to tempt the Risbi. 
Having said this, and having seen that all 
that she wanted had been duly provided, 
she went to the hermitage of the great 
Kaushika, (Veswamitra). 

thus ends the history of Shakuntala in 
the Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 72

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Kanwa said:— 

1. Having been thus addressed, Indra 
commanded the wind to be present with 
Menaka when she would be present before 
the Rishi. 

2. The timid and the beautiful girl then 
entered the hermitage and saw Vishwa¬ 
rn itra, who had destroyed all his sins by 
penances, and who was still engaged in 
austere penances. 

3. Having saluted the Rishi, she then 
began to sport near him. At this very time 
Maruta robbed her of her cloth, which was 
as white as the moon (light.) 

4. And that beautiful girl in great bash¬ 
fulness began to run after the cloth to catch 
it, and she appeared to express her great 
annoyance at tne conduct of Maruta (wind). 

5. She did all this before that great 
Rishi Vishwamitra, as effulgent as the 
fire, and he saw her in that state. He 
marked that she was of faultless features 

6. In her nude state, the best of the 
Rishis saw that Menaka was exceedingly 
beautiful, with no marks of age on her 
person. 

7. Seeing her great beauty and accom¬ 
plishments, that best of Rishis was filled 
with desire and wished for her company. 

8—o. He invited her to come to him, and 
that multless-featured beauty too accep¬ 
ted his invitation. They then passed many 
days in each others' company. Sporting 
with each other, they passed many years 



Abi parvA. 


ibl 


And thought that, it was but only a day. 
That Rishi begot Shakuntala on her. 

to. Menaka went to the banks of the 
river Malini which passed playfully through 
the beautiful valley. of the Himalaya 
mountains, and there she gave birth to a 
daughter. She then left the child there 
(on the banks of the river), and went away. 

ii— 12. thus having been successful in 
her mission, she soon returned to Indra. Some 
vultures, seeing that the child lay in the 
deep forest abounding in lions and tigers, 
sat round it to protect it from harm. So 
that no carnivorous animals might take 
her life, 

13. The vultures protected the life of 
Menakas’ child. I had gone there to per¬ 
form my ablutions. I saw the child lying 

14. In the deep solitude of the forest, 
surrounded by the vultures. Bringing her 
here, 1 have made her my daughter. 

15. According to the scriptures, the 
maker of the body, the protector of life and 
the giver of food, these three, are in their 
order considered to be fathers. 

16. Because she was found in the solitude 
bf the forest, protected by the Sakuntas 
(birds) she has been named Shakuntala (pro¬ 
tected by birds.) 

17. O Brahmana, know that it is thus that 
Shakuntala has become my daughter. And 
faultless Shakuntala also regards me as her 
father. 

Shakuntala said ; — 

18. thus the great Rishi (Kanwa), when 
tasked, told (the Brahmana) the account of 
my birth. O king of men, you must know 
that I have thus become the daughter of 
Kanwa. 

19. Not knowing who is my real father, 
I regard Kanwa as my father. thus have I 
told you, O king, all that I heard about my 
birth. 

thus ends the seventy setond Section , 
the history of Shakuntala t in the Sambhava 
of the Adi Parva . 


Section 73. 
(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Dnshmanta said 

I. O princess, O blessed lady, all that 
you have said is well-spoken. O beauti¬ 
ful lady, be my wife Tell me what I shall 
do (fpr you). 

23. I shall present you, this very day, gold 
and golden-garlands, robes, ear-rings, white 
and beautiful pearls and gems, golden coins 
and finest carpets, collected from various 
countries. Let the whole of my kingdom 
be yours. O beautiful lady, be my wife. 

4. O handsome lady, O timid maiden, 
O beauty of tapering thighs, marry me 
according to the Gandharva form, for this 
form of marriage is said to be the best. 

Shakuntala said 

5. O king, my father has gone from the 
hermitage to collect fruits. Kindly wait for 
a moment. He will bestow me upon you; 

Dushyanta said 

6 . O beautiful lady, O faultless beauty, 

I desire that you yourself should accept me. 
Know that I exist for you. Know also, my 
heart is completely in you. 

7. One is certainly one’s own friend ; one 
can certainly depend upon one’s own self. 
therefore, according to the ordinance, you 
yourself should bestow your own self on 
others. 

8 . According to the ordinance, there 
are eight kinds of marriages, namely, 
Brahma Daiva, Arsha , Prajapatya, Asura. 

9. Gandharva , Rakhasha, and Paisha - 
cha. The son of the self-created (Brahma), 
Manu, has spoken which of these forms 
(of marriages) is appropriate to each of 
the four castes. 

10. O faultless beauty, know that the 
first four forms are appropriate to the Brah- 
manas) and the first six for Kshatriyas. 

11. To the kings, even the Rakhasha 
form is permissable. The Asura form is 
permissable to the Vaisyas and Sudras. 
Of the first five (forms), three are proper 
and two improper. 

12. The Paishatha and Asura forms 
should never be adopted (by any man). 
These are the ordinances of tne scriptures, 
and man should act according to them. 

13. The Gandharva and the Rakhasha 
forms are proper to the Kshatriyas, there¬ 
fore, you need not entertain the least fear 
There is not the least doubt that either 
according to one single form or according 
to the mixed form of these two, marriage is 
proper to us, (and wemay.be married). 

14. O beautiful lady, I am full of desire, 
so are you. You should, therefore, become 
my wife according to the Gandharva form. 

Shakuntala said 

14. O best of the Puru race, if this are 
the dictates of the scriptures, and if I am 
really my own disposer, know then my 
terms. 

15. Promise to give me what I ask, in 
this lonely place, alone, between ourselves. 
The son that will be hereafter born of me 

16. Must become the heir-apparent (to 
your throne). O Dushyanta, I tell you the 
truth. If this be the case, we may be 
united. 

VaisHampayana said 

17. The king without taking time to 
consider the demand, tofd her at once, “O 
beauty of sweet smiles, let it be so. I shall 
even take you to my capital. 

19—20. O handsome maiden, I tell you 
the truth. You deserve all this. I promise to 
do what you ask. So saying, the royal 
sage, (Dushyanta) married tne beautiful 
Shakuntala of graceful walking, according to 
the due rites ; and she accepted him as her 
husband. He returned to his capital after 
assuring her of his promise. He repeatedly 
told her, 

21.I shall send for you my troops of the 
four sorts. O beauty of sweet smiles, it is 
thus (with all honour), I shall take you to 
my capital' 

22. O Janamejaya, having thus promis¬ 
ed to her, the king went away. The king, 
as he went (towards his capital), began to 
think of, Kanwa. 

23. (He thought), "What would the illus¬ 
trious ascetic do when he would hear all/ 
thus thinking on his way, he entered his 
capital. 

24. The moment the king had gone 
away, Kanwa came to the hermitage. But 
Shakuntala did not go out to recieve her 
father for shame. 

25. The great ascetic Kanwa, possessed 
of spiritual knowledge (sight), knew all. 
Having thus seen every thing with his spiri¬ 
tual sight, the illustrious man was pleased 
and said, 

26. “ O amiable child, the act that you 
have committed today in secret without 
having waited (to receive my permission), 
has not been destructive of your virtue. 

27. The marriage according to the 
Gandharva form, without Mantras , and be¬ 
tween a willing woman and a willing man, is 
said to be the best to a Kshatriya. 

a8. The best of men, Dushyanta, is 
virtuous-minded and high-souled. O Sa¬ 
kuntala, you have accepted (this Dushma¬ 
nta) for your husband. 

29. The son, whom you will give birth to, 
will be mighty and illustrious in this world. 
He will extend his sway over the whole of 

his earth bounded by the sea. 


30. When that illustrious king of kings j 
(your son) will march out against his foes, | 
his army will be irresistible to all opposi¬ 
tion/' 

31. Shakuntala then came to her fatigued 
father and washed his feet. She took down 
the heavy load that was on his shoulder 
and placed the fruits in proper order. 
Then she said :— 

32. "(O father), you should give your 
grace to my husband, king Dushyanta, the 
best of men. 

Kanwa said 

33. O beautiful child, I am prepared to 
bless him for your sake. But O blessed 
girl, reckve from me the boon you desire to 
have. JU 

V aishampayana said 

34. Thereupon, Shakuntala, moved with 
the desire to do good to Dushyanta, asked 
the boon that Faurava kings should be ever 
virtuous, and never to be deprived of their 
thrones. 

thus ends the seventy third Section , the 
history of Shakuntala , in the Sambkaw ' 
of the Adi Parva . ! 


Section 74

(SAMBHABA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaishampayanasaid 

1. When Dushyanta went away front j 
the hermitage, making the (above) promises j 
to Shakuntala, she gave birth to a boy of 
immeasurable energy. 

2. When the child grew only three years 
old, he became rn splendour as blazing as 
the blazing fire. O Janamejaya, he was ' 
endued with great beauty, magnanimity and 
all accomplishments. 

3. The best of pious men, Kanwa, per¬ 
formed all the rites ordained by the scrip¬ 
tures on that intelligent boy who began to 
grow up day by day. 

4. The boy was gifted with sharp, strong 
and pearly teeth; he was strong enough to 
kill lions,'—he had all auspicous signs on his 
palms,—he had a broad forehead,—he was 
beautiful and strong. Like a celestial 
child, he began daily to grow up. 

5. When he grew six years old, he was 
so strong that he siezed and bound tigers, 
boars, baffaloes and elephants to the trees 
that stood near the hermitage. 

6. He rode on some of these wild beasts; 
he siezed some of them, and sometimes he 



ATM IPARVA. 


Vbf 


pursued Borneo! them in playful mood. The 
dwellers of the hermitage of Kar.wa, (finding 
all this), gave him a name. (They said,) 
' As he subjugated all beasts, let him be 
called Sarvaaamana'' 

7. thus the prince came to be called 
Sarvadamana ,—endued as he was with great 
strength, energy and powers. 

8. Seeing the extraordinary acts of the 
boy, the Rishi (Kanwa) told Shakuntala that 
the time had come when he should be ins¬ 
talled as the heir-apparent. 

9. Seeing the great strength of the boy, 
Kanwa spoke to nis disciples thus, “Take 
Shakuntala with her son from this hermitage 
to the house of her husband, blessed with¬ 
al I auspicious signs. 

10. It is. not fit for women to live for 
ever in the house of their paternal or me- 
temal relations. Such residence destroys 
their good name, good conduct and virtue. 
therefore, take her to her husband’s house 
without delay.” 

11. The greatly effulgent desciples (of 
Kanwa\ having promised to do it, started 
with Shakuntala and her son towards the city 
of Hastinapur. 

12. That beauty oF fair eye-brows, taking 
her lotus-eyed son of celestial beauty with 
her, left the forest where she had first met 
Dush manta. 

13. Having sent words, she entered the 
royal court with her son, as effulgent as the 
morning sun. And she was then introduced 
to him. 

14. The disciples of the Rishi, having 
told the King every thing, returned to the 
hermitage. And Shakuntala, after duly 
worshipping the King, said, 

Shakuntala said 

15. O King, this is your son. Let him be 
installed as your heir-apparent. O King, 
this god-like boy was begotten by you 
on me. O best of men, fulfil now the 
promise you made to me. 

16. O illustrious man, call to your mind 
the agreement you made with me on the 
occasion of our marriage at the hermitage of 
Kanwa. 

Vaishampayana said 

17. Having heard her words, the King 
remembered everything, but he said, “I re¬ 
member nothing. O wicked ascetic woman, 
to whom do you belong ? 

18. I do not remember to have any 
connection with you with regard to (either) 
Dharma, Artha or Kama. Go, or stay or 
do whatever you please.” 


19. thus being addressed, the beautiful 
ascetic lady was filled with shame. She lost 
her consciousness from grief, and she stood 
like a woden post. 

20. Soon became tier eyes red like cop¬ 
per ; her lips began to quiver ; she cast 
upon the King her (angry) glances which 
seemed to burn him. 

21. Her rising anger and blazing fire of 
her asceticism she kept down with a great 
effort. 

22. Collecting her thought in a moment, 
she thus addressed her husband looking 
straight at him in grief and in anger. 

23. “O great king, knowing every 
thing, how can you, like a mean and inferior 
man, say that you know nothing ? 

24. Your heart is the witness to the truth 
or to the falsehood of my words. therefore, 
speak the truth, and do not degrade your 
self. 

25. He, who has one thing in his mind, 
but represents another thing to others, is a 
thief and a robber of his own self. What sin 
is he not capable of committing ? 

26. You think that you alone know what 
you did. But do you not know that the 
great Omniscient One dwells in your heart. 
He knows all your sins, and you sin in his 
presence. 

27. Man, when sinning, thinks that no 
one sees him. But he is seen by the celes¬ 
tials and by the Diety who dwells in every 
heart. 

28. The sun, the moon, the air, the fire, 
the earth, the sky, the water, the heart, 
Yaina, the day, the night, the twilight and 
Dharma see eveiy act of man. 

29. Yama, the son of Vivaswata, takes 
no account of the sins of that man with whom 
the Diety, the witness of all acts, remains 
pleased. 

30. But that sinner, with whom the great 
Diety is not pleased, is punished by Yama 
for his wicked deeds. 

31. He, who falsely represents his self 
and thus degrades himself, is never blessed 
by the celestials. Even his own soul does 
not bless him. 

32. I have come of my own accord, but 
I am a devoted wife to my husband. Do 
not disrespect me. I am your wife, and 
deserve to be treated respectfully, 

33. Why do you treat me before all 
these men like an ordinary woman ? I aqp 
certainly not crying jn the wilderness. Do 
you not hear me ? 



XOS 


mahabharata. 


34. O Dush manta, 1 ( you refuse what I 
ask you to do, your head will to day be 
divided into a thousand pieces. 

35. The learned men of old say that 
the husband himself entering into the womb 
of his wife, comes out as the son. There¬ 
fore, the wife is called Jaya. 

36. The son, that is born to a wise man, 
rescues the spirits of his deceased ances¬ 
tors. 

37. Because the son rescues his ancestors 
from the hell, called Put , therefore he has 
been called by the self-created (Brahma) 
himself as Putra . 

38. A man conquers the world by the 
birth of a son ; he enjoys eternity by that of 
a gTandson ; the great grandfathers enjoy 
eternal happiness by the birth of a grand¬ 
son’s son. 

39. She is a true wife who is a good 
house-wife ; she is a true wife whose heart is 
devoted to her husband; she is a true wife 
who is faithful to her husband. 

40. A man’s half is his wife, the wife is 
her husbands’ best of friends; the wife is 
the source of Dharma, Artha and Kama ; 
the wife is the source of salvation. 

41. Those that have wives can per¬ 
form religious acts ; those that have wives 
lead demestic lives. Those that have 
wives can be happy, and those that have 
wives can achieve good fortune. 

42. The sweet-speeched wives are their 
husband’s friends on the occasion of joy ; 
they are as fathers on occasions of religious 
acts ; they are as mothers in the hours of 
illness and woe. 

43. Even in the deep forest, the wife is 
the refreshment and solace to her roaming 
husband. He who has a wife, is trusted by 
all. The wife, therefore, is man’s great 
means of salvation. 

44. When the husband goes to the land 
of Yama, leaving this world, it is the devo¬ 
ted wife only that accompanies him there. 

45. The wife, gone bofore (dying before 
her husband), waits for the spirit of her 
husband, and if the husband goes before, 
the chaste wife soon follows him. 

46. O king, for all these reasons, mar¬ 
riage exists (in this world). The husband 
enjoys the company of his wife, both here 
in this world and hereafter. 

47. The learned men have said that a 
man himself is born as his son ; therefore, 
a man whose wife has given birth to a son, 
should look upon her as his mother. 

48. Looking at the face of the son, be¬ 
gotten on his wife, a man sees his own 


face as he does in a mirror ; and feels him 
self as happy as a virtuous man attaining 
to heaven. 

49. Men, burnt by mental grief or afflict¬ 
ed by disease, feel as much relieved as a 
perspiring man does in a cool bath. 

50. No man, even in anger, should even 
do any thing that is disagreeable to his 
wife ; for happiness, joy, virtue and every¬ 
thing depend on the wife. 

51. Wife is the sacred soil in which 
the husband is born again. Even Rishis 
cannot create men without women. 

52. What is a greater happiness to a 
father than what the father fee Is when his 
son, running to him, clasps him with his 
(tiny little) arms, though his body is full 
of dust and dirt ? 

53. Why are you treating with indefer¬ 
ence this your son who has himself come 
to you, and who is wistfully casting his 
glances towards you ? 

54. Even ants support their off-spring 
and do not destroy their eggs. Why then 
should you not, being learned in the rules 
of piety, support your own child T 

55. The touch of the sandal-paste, that 
of women and water, is not so pleasing as 
that of one’s own infant son, locked in his 
embrace. 

56. As the Brahmana is the best among 
bipeds (men), as cow is the best among 
quadrupeds, as preceptor is the best among 
all superiors, so is the son among all objects 
pleasing to the touch. 

57. Let this handsome son touch you in 
your embrace. There is nothing in the 
world more pleasing to the touch than that 
of a son. 

58. O chastiser of foes, O great king, 
I gave birth to this boy, the dispeller of 
your grief, after the completion of three 
years. 

59. O descendant of the Puru race, 
when I was in the lying-in room, the fol- 
owing words were uttered in the sky ,—He 
shall perforki one hundred horse •sacrifices. 

60. Men, going to places remote from 
their homes, take up other men’s sons on 
their laps, and smelling their heads, fed 
great happiness. 

61. You know that the Brahmanas utter 
the following Vedic Mantras at the birth¬ 
day, ceremony of the.child. 

62. 11 You are born of my body ; you 
have sprung from my heart. You are 
myself in the form of my son. Live for one 
hundred years.” 


ADI PARVA. log 


63. “ My life depends on you. The 
continuation of my race also depends on 
you. therefore, live in happiness for one 
hundred years.” 

64. He (this boy) has sprung from your 
body, he is a second being begotten from 
you. Behold your own self in your own 
son, as you see your image in the clear 
waters of the lake. 

65. As the sacrificial fire is kindled from 
the domestic fire, so has this one (your son), 
sprung from you. though you are one, 
you have divided yourself in two. 

66. O king, in your hunting expedition, 
I was approached by you when I was a 
vergin in my father's hermitage. 

67. Urvasi, Provachetta, Sahagani, 
Menaka, Vishwachi, and Ghritachi, these 
are the six formost. Apsaras. 

68. Amongst them again, Menaka, 
born of a Brahmana, is the first. Descend¬ 
ing from heaven on earth, she gave me 
tyrth from her association with Vishwa- 
mittra. 

69. TheApsara Menaka gave me birth 
in a valley of the Himalayas. Devoid 
of affections, she went away, leaving me 
there, as if I was a child of some others. 

70. What great sin did I commit of old 
in some other life that I was cast away by 
my parents in my infancy, and now I am 
cast away by you ? 

71. Cast off from you, 1 am ready to go 
back to the hermitage. But you should 
not cast off this child who is your own son. 

Doshmanta said 

72. O Shakuntala, I do not know that 
I begot this child on you. Women gen¬ 
erally speak falsehood. Who will believe 
your words ? 

73. Your mother is lewd Menaka, desti¬ 
tute of affection ; she cast you off in the 
valley of the Himalayas as one casts off 
the flowers after offering them to the gods. 

74. Your father also is lustful Vishwa¬ 
rn itra of the Kshatriya race, destitute of all 
affection,—the man who was tempted to 
become a Brahmana. 

75. But (if you say), Menaka is the 
foremost of Apsaras, and Vishwamitra 
is the foremost of Rishis, why then do you, 
being their daughter, speak like a lewd 
woman ? 

76. Your these words deserve no cre¬ 
dence. Are you not ashamed to utter them 
,—specially before me ? Go away, O wicked 
ascetic woman. 

77. Where is now that best of great 
Rishis (Vishwamitra), and that best of Ap¬ 


saras Menaka 1 Aad where are you, (though) 
in the humble garb of ascetics. 

78. Your this son is very big, and ap¬ 
pears to be very strong. How has he, 
within so short time, grown up like a Sala 
sprout ? 

79. You are born very low, you speak 
also like a lewd woman. You were lustfully 
conceived by Menaka. 

80. O ascetic woman, all that you say 
is quite unknown to me. I do not know you. 
Go away wherever you please. 

81. O king, you (can) see the faults of 
others, though they may be as small as the 
mustard seed. But you can not see your own 
faults, though they are as big as tne Vilwa 
fruit. 

82. Menaka is a celestial, (nay) Menaka 
is considered to be the best of celestials. O 
Dushyanta, my birth is nobler than your 
own. 

83- O great king, you walk on earth, 
but I roam in the sky. Know that the diff¬ 
erence between you and me is like that of a 
mustard seed and the Meru (mountain.) 

84. O king, behold,—I can go to the 
abodes of Indra, Kuvera, Yama aad 
Varuna. 

85. O sinless man, there is a proverb 
which I am going to mention to you ; (but I 
am not doing it) from any evil motive, but 
on!}' as an example. therefore, kindly 
pardon me for referring to it. 

86. The ugly man, until he secs his face 
in a mirror, considers himself more hand¬ 
some than others. 

87. But when he sees his own face in the 
mirror, it is then that he perceives the diff¬ 
erence between himself and others. 

88. He, who is really very handsome, 
never taunts others. He, who too much 
vilifies others, is only considered to be a 
reviler. 

89. As the swine seeks for the dirt and 
filth even when it is in a flower-garden, so 
does a wicked man chose only evil out of the 
evil and the good that others speak. 

90. But as the geese always extract 
milk, though mixed with water, so docs a 
wise man accept only what is good from the 
speech that is intermixed with both gtood and 
evil. 

91. Honest men always feel pain to 
speak ill of others but wicked men always 
derive pleasure in doing it. 

92. Honest men always feel pleasure 
in showing respect towards the old (good 
men), but the fools always feel pleasure 
in abusing them) 



no 


MAWABHARATA. 


93. Honest men are happy in not seek¬ 
ing others' fault, but the fools are happy 
in doing it. The wicked always speak ill of 
honest men, but honest men never injure the 
wicked, even if injured by them. 

94. What could be more ridiculous in 
the world than this, that those that are wick¬ 
ed should represent really honest men as 
wicked. 

95. Even athiests are afraid of those who 
have fallen from truth and virtue, as all men 
are afraid of the snakes of virulent poison. 
(When such is the case with an athiest), 
what shall I speak of me who is a thiest ? 

96. The man, who having begotten a 
son who is his own image, does not look 
after him, never gains the higher worlds. 
The celestials destroy his good fortune and 
wealth. 

97. The Pitris (ancestors) have said 
that the son continues the race and supports 
the relations ; therefore, to give birth to a son 
is the best of all pious acts; therefore, your 
this son should not be abondoned. 

98. Manu has said that there are five 
kinds of sons, namely those begotten by one 
on his wife, those obtained from others, 
those purchased for a price, those reared out 
of affection, and those begotten on other 
women. 

09. Sons support the religion and 
achievements of men; they increase their 
happiness; they rescue the dead ancestors 
from hell. 

100. therefore, O best of kings, it is 
not proper for you to abondon your son. O 
king of the earth, cherish your own self, 
truth and virtue, (by cherishing your this 
son). 

101. O best of kings, it is not proper for 
you to play hipocri's in this matter. The 
dedication of a tank is more meritorious 
than that of one hundred wells. A sacrifice 
is more meritorious than the dedication of a 
tank. But (to beget a son) is more merito¬ 
rious than the celebration of sacrifices. 
Truth (however) is more meritorious than the 
birth of one hundred sons. 

102. If one hundred horse-sacrifices and 
truth were weighed, truth would be found 
heavier than one hundred horse-sacrifices. 

103. O king, I tell you, truth is equal to 
the sudy of the entire Vedas and ablutions 
in all the sacred pilgrimages, 

104. There is no virtue equal to truth, 
there is nothing (in this world) superior to 
truth. And there is nothing (again) more 
sinful than falsehood. 

ie$. O king, truth is the great Brahma, 
truth is the great vow; therefore, O king, do 


not violate your pledge. Let truth and 
yourself be ever united. 

106. If, however, you are united with 
falsehood, if you do not place any credence 
on my word, I shall go away from this 
place of my own accord. Your companion¬ 
ship should not be sought after. 

107. But, O Dushyanta, (know this 
for a certainty), that when you are dead, my 
this son shall rule the whole earth, surround¬ 
ed by the four seas and adorned by the 
king of mountains. 

Vaishampayana said 

108. Having said all this to the king, 
Shakuntala turned her back. Thereupon a 
voice from the sky, coming from one who 
had no visible shape, addressed Dushyanta 
who was sitting, surrounded by his minis¬ 
ters, priests and Ritvjikas. 

109. (It said), "O Dushyanta, the 
mother is but a sheath of flesh (within which 
the son dwells). The son, sprungfrom the 
father, is the father himself. therefore, 
cherish your son and do not insult Sakun¬ 
tala. 

no. O best of men, the son begotten by 
one's own self, rescues him from the abode 
of Yama. You are the father of this son. 
Shakuntala has spoken the truth. 

in. The husband divides his body in 
two parts and is born in the womb of his 
wife as the son. O king, O Dushyanta, 
therefore, cherish your this son, born of 
Sakuutala. 

112. To forsake one's own son and to 
live thereafter is a great misfortune. There¬ 
fore, O descendant of the Puru race, cherish 
your this high-souled son, born of Sakun¬ 
tala. 

113. As you will cherish this child at our 
word, therefore, your this son will be known 
by the name of Bharata. 

114. Having heard these words of the 
dwellers of heaven, the king of the Puru 
race was much pleased, and addressiug his 
priests and ministers, he said:— 

115. 41 Hear all of you the words of the 
messenger'of heaven. I myself know that 
this boy is my son. 

116. If I had accepted him as my son at 
Shakuntala's words, my people would have 
been suspicious, and my son also would not 
have been considered to be pure (of pure 
birth)." 

Vaishamapay ana said:— 

117. O descendant of the Varata race, 
the king was exceedingly pleased, because 
the purity of the birth of his son was estab¬ 
lished by the messenger of heaven. 



ADI PARVA. 


lit 


ti8. He then performed with joy all 
those rites which a father should perform 
for his son. 

119. He smelt his son’s head; he em¬ 
braced him with affection. The Brahmanas 
uttered blessings on him, and the bards 
began to applaud him. 

120. The king then enjoyed the great 
pleasure that one feels at the touch of one’s 
own son. Dushyanta also received his 
wife (Shakuntala) with all honour and 
affection. Affectionately pacifying her, he 
spoke to her thus ;— 

121—22. “O lady, my union with you 
took place in private. None knew of it, and 
therefore, it is natural that people should 
have thought that our union was only out of 
lust, and that we were not husband and 
wife. This son, installed as my heir-appa¬ 
rent, would have been considered as a man 
of impure birth. therefore, I was thinking 
how best to establish your purity. 

123. O dearest, O lady of beautiful eyes, 
1 have forgiven you for all the hard words 
you have uttered in anger. You are my 
darling.” 

124. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
having spoken thus to hris dear queen 
(Shakuntala), the royal sage Dushyanta, 
received her with the presents of perfume, 
food and drink. 

105. The king Dushyanta, thereupon, 
installed the son of Shakuntala as his neir- 
apparent, bestowing upon him the name of 
Bharata. 

126. From that day the invincible car of 
Bharata, like the car of the celestials, with 
its famous and bright wheels, traversed the 
whole earth, filling it with its rattle. 

127. The son of Dushyanta (Bharata) 
brought under his sway all the kings of 
the world. He ruled his subjects virtuously 
and gained great fame. 

128. That king (Bharata) was known 
by the name of Chakravarti and Sarva- 
\vaiima . He performed many sacrifices like 
Indra, the lord of the Marutas. 

129. Kanwa was the chief priest in 
those sacrifices, and great offerings were 
made to the Brahmanas. The fortunate 
king performed both the cow and the horse- 
sacrinces. 

130. Bharata gave one thousand gold 
coins to Kanwa as his sacrificial fee. From 
this Bharata has followed this, “ achieve¬ 
ment of Bharatafrom him has sprung 
this gTeat race (of Bharata.) 

131—32. All kings that were born after 
him are called after nis name. And in this 
Bharata race were many god-like and 


greatly powerful best of rriondrchs. They 
were like Brahma himself. Their name? 
are countless. 

133. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
I shall name only the chief ones, who were 
all blessed with great fortune and devoted 
to truth and honesty. They were all 
like the celestials. 

thus ends the seventy fourth Section , the 
end of the history of Shakuntala , in the 
Samhnava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 75

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued, 

Vaishampanya said 

i. O sinless one, Prajapati Daksha, 
Vaivatsata Manu, Bharata, Kuru, Pura, 
Ajamira, 

2—3. Jadava and all the other kings of 
the Bharata race,—O sinless king, 1 shall 
now recite the holy, illustrious, ana long life- 
bestowing histories of these great men. They 
were as effulgent as the sun and the great 
Rishis. 

4. Prachata had ten sons, who were all 
devoted to asceticism, and they all possessed 
every virtue. They burnt w ith the fire of 
their mouth many medicinal plants. 

5. O best of king, from them was born 
Prachatas Daksha, and from Daksha sprang 
all creatures. therefore, he was called the 
Grandsire. 

6. The Rishi Daksha, born of Prachatas, 
begot one thousand sons, uniting with 
Virini; they were all of rigid vows like 
himself. 

7. Narada taught these one thousand 
sons of Daksha the excellent philosophy 
of Sankhya, the means of salvation. 

8. O Janamejaya, the lord of creation 
Prajapati Daksha, from the desire of ereat- 
ing more creatures, begot fifty daughters. 
He made them all his Putrees, 

9. He bestowed ten of his daughter? 
on Dakshha, thirteen on Kashyapa, and 
twenty-seven on Chandra who were all en¬ 
gaged In indicating time. 

10. Kashyapa, the son of Marichi, be- 
bot on his wife, the daughter of Dakhsha, 
who was the eldest among his thirteen wives, 
Aditya, 

11. The greatly effulgent celestials, Indra, 
being at their head, and Vivaswata also. 
Vivaswata’s son was born Yama, the great 
lord. 

12. Mart an da (Vivaswata) begot another 
son who was gifted with great intelligei™ 



MAHA&HARATA. 


lit 


and he was called Manu. Yama was his 
younger brother. 

13. Manu was greatly wise and virtuous; 
he became the progenitor of a race. The 
offspring of Manu were called Manavas, 
(human beings.) 

14. It was from Manu that all men, in¬ 
cluding Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and others 
have been born. O great king, the Brah¬ 
manas and Kshatriyas were subsequently 
united. 

15. Those sons of Manu, who were Brah¬ 
manas, became devoted to the study of 
the Vedas. Vena, Qhrishnu, Norishyana, 
Navaga, Ikshaku, 

16. Kurusha, and Sarjati, the eighth a 
daughter, named Ila, the ninth Prishadhru, 
who was gifted with all the virtues of 
Kshatriyas. 

17. Nabhagarishata was the tenth son 
of Daksha. Besides these, Manu had fifty 
other Sons on earth, 

18. We have heard, they all perished 
quarrelling with one another. The learned 
Pururava was born of I la. 

1 8. We have heard that Ila was both 
the father and the mother of Pururava. He 
had sway over thirteen islands of the sea. 
though he was a human being, yet he re¬ 
mained always surrounded by superhuman 
companions. 

20. Pururava, intoxicated with the pride 
of power which he possessed, quarrelled 
with the Brahmanas, caring little for their 
anger. He robbed them of their wealth. 

21. Seeing this, Sanatkumar came from 
the region of Brahma, and gave him good 
counsel, which he did not accept. 

22. Thereupon, the wrath of the great 
Rishis was excited’, and the king, who was 
intoxicated with the pride of power and who 
lost his reason, was immediately killed by 
their curse. 

23. This king (Pururava) brought from 
the region of tne Gandharvas, three kinds 
of fire for sacrificial purposes with the 
Apsara Urvashi. 

24. He begot six sons on Urvasi, namely 
Ayus, Dhiniata, Amavasu, Dhridhayus, 
and Sfittayus. 

25. It is said that Ayus begot on the 
daughter of Swarvavanu four sons, namely 
Nahusha, Vrihadhasarmana, Rajingaya, 
and Anenas. 

26. O king, of all the sons of Ayus, 
Nahusha was exceedingly intelligent and 
powerful. He ruled his kingdom with great 
virtue. 


27. King Nahusha equally supported! 
the Pitris, tne Devas, the Rishis, the Gan 
dharvas, the Nagas, theRakshasas, the Brah¬ 
manas, the Kshatriyas and the Vaisyas. 

28. He suppressed all the robbers with 
a mighty hand ; he made them pay tribute 
to the Rishis and carry them on their back 
as beasts of burdens. 

29. Beating the very dwellers of heaven 
with his beauty, his asceticism, his prowess 
and energy, he ruled the earth, as if he 
was Indra himself. 

30. Nahusha begot six sweet-speeched 
sons, namely, Yati, Yayati, Sanyati, Ajati, 
Ayati and Dhrava. 

31. Yati adopted asceticism, and became 
a great Rishi like Brahma himself. Yayati 
became greatly virtuous. 

32. He ruled over the whole earth; he 
performed many sacrifices, 1 he worshipped 
the Pitris with great reverence, And showed 
a great respect towards the celestials. 

33. He showed great kindness and 
favour to all his subjects, and he was never 
defeated by any foe. His sons were all 
great bow-men, and were gifted with all 
accomplishments. 

34. O great king, they were born of 
Devayani and SarmTshta, his too wives. 
From Devayani were born Yadus and 
Tarvasu. 

35. From Sartnishta Were born Drahyu, 
Anu, and Puru. O king, after ruling his 
subjects with virtue for a Tong time, 

36. The son of Nahusha (Yayati) 
was attacked by the terrible old age which 
destroyed his personal beauty. Having 
been thus attacked by old age, the king 
thus addressed his sons, 

37—38. Namely Yadu, Purti, Tarvasu# 
Drahyu and Anu, “ O Dear sorts, 1 wish 
to be young, and desire to pass my time 
with young women. Help me In this” 
His eldest son, bont of Devayani said, 

39. “What do you require? Do you 
want to have our youth ?’’ Yayati replied, 
“ Accept my old age. 

40. I would then efijoy rrtyself with 
your youth. . During a long sacrifice, I was 
cursed by the Rishi Usanas, and therefore# 
thus have I lost all tny powers of enjoying 
sensual pleasures. O sons, I shall enjoy 
myself with your youth. 

41. (therefore), take any of you my 
decrepitude, and rule tne kingdom with my 
body. I would then enjoy myself with a 
renovated youthful body. 

42. Yadu and other sons did not 
agree to take upon them his old age. 



ADI 

Thereupon, his youngest son, the Virtuous 
and powerful Puru said, 

43. “O king, enjoy again with a reno¬ 
vated body and returned youth. I shall take 
upon me your old age, and I shall rule the 
kingdom at your command/ 1 

44. thus being addressed, the royal 
sage (Yayati) transferred his bid age on his 
high-souled son (Puru) with his power of 
asceticism. 

45. The king again became a young man 
with the youth of Ruru ; and Puru with the 
old age of his father upon him ruled the 
kingdom. 

46. Even when one thousand years had 
thus passed away, Yayati. the best of kings, 
the invincible hero, remained as strong and 
powerful as a tiger. 

47. He enjoyed for a long time the 
sweet company of his two wivp. He en¬ 
joyed with (Apsara) Vishwachi in the gar¬ 
dens of Chitraratha (Gandharva king.) 

48. That illustrious man had not his 
desires satiated even after this. There¬ 
upon, the king remembered the following 
words of the Purana. 

49. 11 One’s desires are never satiated 
with enjoyments. On the other hand, with 
indulgence they flame up like the sacrificial 
fire with Ghee poured into it. 

50. Even if one enjoys the wtyole earth, 
with its wealth, its diamonds, gol.l, animals 
and women, still his desires will not be 
satiated. 

51. It is only when a man does not 
commit a sin in thought, deed or word in 
respect of any living creatures, it is then 
that he attains to the purity of Brahma. 

52. When a man fears nothing, and 
when he is feared by none, when he desires 
for nothing, and when he injures none, it is 
then that he attains to the purity of Brahma.” 

53. The greatly wise king, seeing this, 
and having been satisfied that one’s desires 
are never satiated, received back his old age 
from his son. 

54. though his desires were not satiated, 
he gave back his youth to his son Puru, and 
installed him on the throne, saying, 

55. “From you my race would cotinue. 
You are my true son and hsir. My race 
will be known in the world after your name.” 

Vaishampayana said 

56. That best of kings, (Yayati), having 
installed Puru on the throne went to the 
mount Brigu to become a great ascetic. 

57. After many years he succumbed to 
the inevitable influence of Time. Observing 


PARVA 1 13 

the vow of fasting, he ascended heaven 
with his wives. 

thus ends the seventy fith Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva, 


Section 76

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Janamejaya said:— 

t. How did our ancestor (Yayati) who 
was the tenth from Praiapati, obtain the 
unobtainable daughter of SuVra ? 

2. O great ascetic, I desire to hear this 
in detail. Tell me also separately the ac¬ 
count of those kings who were the founders 
of dynasties. 

Vaishampayana said 

3—4. O J; namejaya, the king Yayati 
was as effulgent as indra himself. I shall 
tell you in reply to your question how Sukra 
and Vrishaparva bestowed (on the king> 
their daughters in due rites, and I shall 
specially narrate how the union of the king 
Yayati, the son of Nahusha, took place 
with Devayani. 

5. In the days of yore, great battles 
were often faugnt between the Devas and 
the Asuras for the sovereignty over the 
three worlds. 

6. From the desire of securing victory, 
the celestials appointed the Rishi who was 
the son of Angirasha (Vrihaspati) as their 
priest to conduct their sacrifices; and their 
opponents appointed Usanas (Sukra) as 
their priest tor the same purpose. 

7. There was much boastful rivalry be¬ 
tween these two Brahmanas. All those Da- 
navas that were killed in battle by the Devas 

8. Were revived by that sage (Sukra) 
with the power of his knowledge; and they, 
thus being made alive, fought again with the 
celestials. 

9. The Asuras also killed many Devas, 
but the greatly learned Vrihaspati could not 
revive them. 

10. He did not know the science of 
Sanjibani ( giving life to the dead) which the 
greatly powerful Rishi (Sukra) knew very 
well. The celestials were, therefore, very 
sorry. 

11. Thereupon, the celestials, in great 
anxiety and in fear of the learned Usanas, 
went to Kacha, the eldest son of Vrihaspati; 
and they spoke to him thus, 

12. “We ask for your protection, we 
worship you. Help us in a work which ‘ 


15 



l!4 


MAHABHARATA. 


consider as very important. The knowledge 
of that science whicn is known to that Bran- 
mana of immeasurable prowess, 

13. Sukra, must be obtained by you as 
soon as possible. You will then be a shnr- 
er with us in all sacrificial offerings. You 
shall find that Brahmana (Sukra) in the 
court of (king) Vrishaparva. 

14. He always protects the Danavas, but 
never the celestials, their opponents. You 
are younger than he, and you are, therefore, 
able to revere him. 

15. You can also adore Devayani, the 
favourite daughter of that illustrious man. 
You are capable of conciliating them both. 
There is none else who can do it. 

16. You are sure to obtain that know¬ 
ledge (of Sanjibani from the Rishi) by 
gratifying Devayani with your conduct, liber¬ 
ality, sweetness, and general behaviour.” 

17. Having been thus addressed and 
worshipped by the celestials, he said, “Be it 
so.” He then went to the court of king 
Vrishaparva. 

18. O king, having been thus sent by 
the celestials, Kacha soon came to the city of 
the king of the Asuras; and seeing Sukra 
there, he thus addressed him, 

19. “Reverend Sir, accept me as your 
disciple. I am the grandson of Kishi 
Angirasha and the son of Vrihaspati. I am 
known as Kacha by name. 

20. Accepting you as my great preceptor, 
I shall practise Brahmacharya for one thou¬ 
sand years. therefore, command me. 

Sukra said 

21. O Kacha, you are welcome. T accept 
vour words. 1 shall treat you with regard, 
tor by my doing it, Vrihaspati will be 
regarded. 

Vaishampay&na said 

22. Commanded by the son of Kavi, 
Usanas, also called Sukra, Kacha said, “Be 
t so.” And he took the vow he spoke of. 

23. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
(Kacha) took the vow he had spoken of at 
the proper time and began to worship his 
preceptor (Sukra) and Devayani. 

24. That youth (Kacha) daily gratified 
Devayani who was also in her youth with 
singing, dancing and playing on various 
kinds of instRuruents. 

25. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
he gratified that maiden, Devayani, who was 
in her youth, with the presentations of 
flowers and fruits, and serving her as an 
obedient servant. 


26. And Devayani also, when they were 
alone, gratified that vow-observing youth 
(Kacha) with her songs and sweetness of 
manners. 

27. When five hundred years had thus 
passed away of hip vow, the Danavas came 
to know his intention. 

28. One day the Danavas saw Kacha 
when he was tending (his preceptor's) kine. 
They then killed him out of the hatred they 
bore against Vrihaspati and from the desire 
of saving the knowledge of Sanjibani . 

29. They hacked him to pieces and 
gave his body to be devoured by jackets and 
wolves. The kine returned to the fold with¬ 
out the cow-herd (Kacha). 

30. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
when Devayani saw that the kine had returned 
without Kacha, she spoke to her father thus, 

Devayani said 

3. O sire, the Agnihoira evening fire) 
is kindled, the sun has also set. The kine 
have come back without their cow-herd. But 
Kacha is not to be seen. 

32. O father, it is evident, Kacha is 
either dead or killed. I tell you truly that 
I shall not live without him. 

Sukra said:— 

33. 1 will revive him by saying, “Come 
here.” Then with the help of the knowledge 
of Sanjibani, he summoned Kacha (to come 
to him.) 

34. Having been thus summoned, Kacha 
appeared in ioy, tearing the bodies of the 
wolves (that nad devoured him.) 

35. Having been asked by the daughter 
of Vargava, (Sukra) the reason of his delay, 
he said, “O sweet lady, burdened with sacri¬ 
ficial wood and kusa grass, 

36. I was coming towards the hermitage, 
and feeling tired, 1 sat under a banian tree. 
All the kine also were staying under the 
shade of that tree. 

37. The Asuras, having seen me there, 
asked me, “Who are you ?” They heard 
my this reply, “I am Kacha, the son of 
Vrihaspati.” 

38. As soon as I said this, those Danavas 
killed me, and having hacked my body to 
pieces, they gave it to jackals and wolves. 
They then went to their homes in joy. 

39. O amiable lady, summoned by the 
illustrious Vargava (your father), I have 
somehow or other come before you having 
been made alive.” 

40. On another occasion, the Brahmana 
Kacha at the request of Devayani, went into
the forest to collect flowers and when 
he was freely roaming there, he was again 
seen by the Danavas. They again killed 
him, (pounded him to powders) and mixed 
him with the waters of the ocean. 

41. Finding him again late in coming 
home, that maiden again told her father 
what had happened. Having been again 
summoned by that Brahmana (Sukra) to 
come home, Kacha appeared before the 
daughter of his preceptor. He again re¬ 
flated to her all that had happened to 
him. 

42. They killed him for the third time. 
And having reduced him to ashes by burn¬ 
ing, they mixed those ashes with the wine 
which they offered to the Brahmana (Sukra). 

43 Devayani again spoke to her father 
thus, “ O father, Kacha was sent to gather 
flowers, but he is not to be seen. 

44. It is evident, Kacha is either dead 
or killed. I tell you truly, I shall not live 
without him. 

Sukra said 

45  O daughter, the son of Vrihaspati, 
Kacha has gone to the land of the Dead. 
though again and again revived by my knowledge
is often killed. What shall I do ?  

46— 47 - O Devayani, do not grieve, do 
not weep. One like you should not grieve 
for one who is mortal. You are worshipped 
by Brahma, by Brahmanas, the celestials 
with (their king) Indra, the Vasus, the 
Ashwiiris, the Asuras and by the whole 
universe. It is impossible to keep him 
alive. For every time I revive him he is 
killed (by the Danavas.) 

Devayani said:— 

48. Why should I not grifcve and weep 
for Kacha, whose grandfather is old 
Angirasha himself and whose father is the 
great ascetic Vrihaspati, who is the grand¬ 
son of a Rishi and the son of a Rishi. 

49  He himself is a Brahmachari and 
an ascetic; he is always wakeful in every 
work. O father, I shall starve and follow 
the way on which Kacha has gone. The 
handsome Kacha is dear to me. 


Vaishampayana said 

50 - The great Rishi (Sukra), the son of 
Kavi, being much afflicted by Deviant's 
words, cried in anger, “ The Asuras cer¬ 
tainly want to injure me, for they killed my 
disciple living with me. 

51 • These followers of Rudra (Asuras) 
want to make me a non-Brahmana by making 
rtie participate in their crimes of killing Brah¬ 
manas. The crime of killing a Brahmana 
even bums Indra. This crime has a terri¬ 
ble end.” Having said this, he summoned 


Kacha, but being afraid of his preceptor's 
safety, he feebly replied from within the 
stomach of Sukra. 

52. Sukra then asked him, “O Brah¬ 
mana, how have you entered my 9tomach 1° 

Kacha said 

By your grace my memory has not left 
me. I recollect every thing that had hap- 
hened to me. My ascetic virtues also 
have not been destroyed. therefore, 1 am 
capable of bearing this insufferable pain. 

53. O son of Kavi, I was killed by the 
Asuras; my body .was burnt and reduced 
to ashes, and I was then given to you with 
your wine. O Brahmana, when you are pre¬ 
sent, how is it possible for the Asura Maya 
(the power of the Asuras) to overcome the 
Brahma Maya (the power of the Brah¬ 
manas.) 

Sukra said •— 

54. O Devayani, what good can 1 do to 
you ? Kacha’s life can be revived only 
with my death. Kacha is within me. There 
is no other way of his coming out, except 
by ripping open my stomach. 

Devayani said 

55. Both the shocks will burn me like 
fire. The death of Kacha and that of yours 
are both same to me. The death of Kacha 
will kill me. If you die, I shall not be able 
to bear life. 

Sukra said 

56. O son of Vrihaspati, you arc crowned 
with success, when Devayani adores you so 
much. If you are not Indra in the guise 
of Kacha, to-day, accept,—I give you the 
science of reviving life. 

57. None can come out alive from my 
s omach. A Brahmana, however, must not be 
killed. therefore, accept the knowledge I 
teach you. 

58. Come to life again as my son. Poss¬ 
essed of the knowledge I teach you, and 
being again revived by me, O child, take 
care that you act with gratitude when you 
come out of my stomach. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

59. Receiving the knowledge (of reviving 
life) from his preceptor, the handsome 
Kacha ripped open the stomach (of Sukra), 
and came out like the moon on the evening ■ 
of the full-moon night. 

60. Seeing the remains of his preceptor 
lying like a heap of ascetic virtues and 
learning, Kacha revived him with the know¬ 
ledge he had received. He then spoke to the 
preceptor thus, 



f i6 


MAHABHARATA. 


61. "I regard him, who pours the Ambro¬ 
sia of knowledge into one's ears, as you 
have done to me who was devoid of know¬ 
ledge, both as my father and as ray mother. 
He who has gratitude can never injure his 
preceptor. 

62. Those that, having acquired know¬ 
ledge, injure their preceptor who is an 
object of adoration, who is the giver of 
knowledge, and who is the most precious of 
all precious objects on earth, become hated 
on earth, and finally go to the regions of the 
sinful. 

Vaishampayana said 

63-64. Having been deceived while 
under the influence of wine, and remember¬ 
ing the terrible consequeuces of drink and 
the total loss of consciousness, the result of it, 
and seeing before him the handsome Kacha 
whom he had dmnk with the wine while 
intoxicated, (the learned Sukra), with the 
wish of effecting a reform in the manners 
of the Brahmanas, rose from the ground in 
anger, and spoke thus, 

65. "That wretched Brahmana, who 
being unable to resist the temptation, will 
drink liquor from this day, shall be consi¬ 
dered as to have committed the sin of slay¬ 
ing a Brahmana, and he shall be hated both 
in this and in the other world. 

66. I set this limit to the conduct of 
the Brahmanas everywhere. Let this (my 
solemn words) be heard by the honest men, 
by the Brahmanas, by the celestials, and by 
those who regard their superiors.” 

67. Having said this, the illustrious 
Rishi, the ascetic of ascetics, summoned the 
Danavas who had been deprived of their 
good sense by Fate. He then told them, 

63 . " O foolish Danavas, know that 
Kacha had obtained his wish. He will 
henceforth dwell with me. Having obtained 
the knowledge of Sanjibani , that illustrious 
Brahmana has become as powerful as 
Brahma himself.” 

69. Having said this much, Bhargava 
fSukra) stopped. The Danavas, being as¬ 
tonished, went away to their homes. 

70. Kacha, after having lived with his 
precep to r for full one thousand years, pre¬ 
pared to go to the land of the celestials with 
the permission of his preceptor. 

thus ends the seventy sixth Section the 
histary of Yaymii , in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parr. 


Section 77

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. When the period of his vow expired, 
and when he was prepared to go to the land 
of the celestials, after having received the 
permission of his preceptor, Devayani ad¬ 
dressed him thus, 

2. “ O the grandson of Rishi Angirasha, 
you shine most brightly in conduct, in birth, 
in learning, in asceticism and in humility. 

3. As the Rishi Angirasha is honoured by 
my illustrious father, so is (your father) 
Vrihaspati honoured and respected by me. 

4. O great ascetic, knowing this, hear 
what 1 say. You are aware of ray beha¬ 
viour towards you during the period of your 
vow. 

5. Your vow is now over; you should 
now fix your affection on me who love you. 
Accept my hand with ordained rites and 
Mantras . 

lTanlia said:— 

6. You are an object of my respect and 
worship, as is your illustrious hither. O lady 
of faultless features, you are an object of 
greater reverence to me (than your father). 

7. You are dearer than life to the high- 
souled Bhargava. O amiable lady, you 
are ever worthy of my worship, as you are 
the daughter of my preceptor. 

8. As your father Sukra, my preceptor, is 
ever honoured by me, so are you. O Dev¬ 
jani, therefore, you should not speak to me 
thus. 

Devayani said:— 

9. O best of the twice born, you are the 
son of my preceptor's son. you are not the 
son of m> father. therefore, you are an 
object of my respect and worship. 

10. O Kacha, when the Asuras killed 
you again and again, you should recollect to¬ 
day the love 1 showed towards you. 

11. O virtuous man, remembering my 
love and affection for you, and also my de¬ 
voted regard for you, you should not abant 
don me without any faults. 

Kacha said:— 

12. O lady of virtuous vows, do no¬ 
urge me into such a sinful course. O lady 
of fair eye-brows, be graceful to me. O 
amiable lady, you are an object of greater 
regard than my preceptor. 

13. O targe-eyed lady. O lady of hand¬ 
some face, O amiable maiden, the place 



At> t PARVA. 


the body of the sort of Kavi, (Sukra) where 
you live, is also my abode. 

14. You are truly my sister. O slender- 
Waisted lady, O amiable maiden, do not say 
so. We have most happily passed the days 
we have lived together. There is perfect 
good feeling now existing between us. 

15. I ask your leave to go away. Bless 
roe so that good may come to my journey. 
Remember me in your conversations as one 
who has not transgressed virtue. Serve my 
preceptor with readiness and singleness of 
heart. 

Devayani said 

16. If you refuse to make me your wife, 
solicited by me as I do, O Kacha, (indeed I 
say) your knowledge will bear no fruits, 

Kacha said 

17. I refused to comply with your request, 
because you are my preceptor’s daughter. 
(I did not refuse you) for any fault of yours. 
My preceptor also had not issued any com¬ 
mand regarding this matter. Curse me if it 
pleases you. 

18. O Devayani, I have told you what 
should be the conduct of Rishis. I, there¬ 
fore, do not deserve your curse. But not¬ 
withstanding all this you have cursed me 
out of desire and not from a sense of duty. 

19. therefore, your desire shall not be 
fulfilled, no Rishi’s son will ever accept 
your hand. 

20. You have said that my knowledge 
would not bear fruits. Let it be so. But it 
shall bear fruits in him whom I shall teach it. 

Vaishampayana said 

21. Havirg said this to Devayani, that best 
of Brahmanas, that foremost of the twice- 
born, Kacha hurriedly went away to the land 
of the celestials. 

22. Seeing him arrived, the celestials #ith 
Indra at their head looked with delight to¬ 
wards Vrihaspati, and spoke to him thus. 

The Dev&s said:— 

23. You have performed an act of great 
good for us ; your achievements are wonder¬ 
ful, your fame will never die. you will be 
the sharer with us in the sacrificial offerings. 

thus ends the seventy seventh chapter, 
the history of Yayati, in the Sambhava of 
the Adi Parva . 


Section 78
(SAMBHABA PARVA).— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O best of the Bharata race, the dwel¬ 
lers of heaven were exceedingly glad to get 


rt; 

back Kacha who had learnt the knowledge 
(oi Sartjibani). The celestials then learnt 
the Sanjibani from Kacha, and considered 
their object achieved. 

2. They all assembled together and thus 
spoke to Indra, “O Indra, the time has 
come to show your prowess. Kill your 
enemies.” 

3. Having been thus addressed, Indra 
said “Be it so.” He then, accompanied 
by the celestials set out. He saw many 
damsels in the forest. 

4. The maidens,were sporting in a lake 
in the wood which was like that of Cbitra- 
ratha. Changing himself into wind, he 
(Indra) mixed up their clothes. 

5. The maidens, after rising from the 
water all together, put on the clothes which 
each got near her from the mixed up heap. 

6. The cloth of Devayani was thus taken 
up and worn by Sarmishta, the daughter 
of king Vrishaparva, not knowing that it be¬ 
longed to others. 

7. O great king, a dispute, thereupon, 
arose between Devayani and Sarmishta. 

Devayani said 

8. O daughter of the Asura, how do you 
dare take my cloth, being my pupil. Desti¬ 
tute of good conduct, nothing good can come 
to you. 

Sarmishta said 

9. Whether my father is sitting or lying 
your father, occupying a lower seat, and 
casting his eyes downwards, adores him like 
a Bandi (a chanter of praises.) 

10. You are the daughter of a man who 
begs, and I am the daughter of one who 
bestoivs alms. Your father chants praises 
of others, and my father’s praises are 
chanted. Your father lives on alms, my 
father bestows them. 

11. O begger's girl, you are free to strike 
your breast, to use harsh words, to vow 
enmity to me, and to give way to your wrath. 
O beggerly woman, you weep in vain. You 
cannot harm me, though I can harm you. 
You desire to quarrel with me, but I do not 
at all consider you as my equal. 

V aishampayana said 

12. Having heard this, Devayani became 
very angry, and she began to tear fcef cMti. 
But Sarmishta, throwing her into a well, 
went away to her home. 

13. The wicked Sarmishta thought her 
to be dead, and went home in a wrathful 
mood. 



MAHABHARATA. 


Il8 


. 14, When she went away, the son of 
Nahusha, Yayati came to that place; he 
was after deer. The pair of horses in his car 
were fatigued, and he himself was thirsty. 

15. That son of Nahusha (Yayati) saw 
a well in which there was no water. There 
(in that well) the king saw a maiden as 
effulgent as fire. 

16. Seeing her within the well, the illus¬ 
trious king addressed that girl who waa as 
beautiful as a celestial maiden. That best 
of kings, pacifying her with sweet words 
said, 

17. O fair lady, O lady with bright nails, 
as burnished copper, and with ear-rings 
of celestial gems, who are you ? Why are you 
in such anxiety ? Why are you weeping in 
distress ? 

18. How have you fallen into this well 
covered with long grass and creepers ? O 
beauty of slender-waist, tell me truly, whose 
daughter are you ? 

Devayani said 

19. I am the daughter of Sukfa who 
revives the Asuras, killed by the celestials. 
He knows not what has befallen me.. 

20. O king, this is my right hand with 
nails as bright as the burnished copper. 
You are nobly born,---I ask you, take my 
hand and raise me up. 

21. I know, you are very gentle, very 
powerful and greatly famous. You should 
raise me up from this well. 

Vaishampayana said 

22. The son of Nahusha, king (Yayati), 
having learnt that 9he was the daughter of a 
Bcahmana, took hold of her right hand, 
and raised her up from that well. 

23. The king, after speedily raising 
her from the well, and speaking sweet and 
courteous words to that beauty of tapering 
thighs, went away to his own capital. 

24. After the departure of the son of 
Nahusha (Yayati), the faultless featured 
Devayani spoke in sorrow to Ghurnika who 
came there. 

Devayani said 

25. O Ghurnika, go speedily to my 
father and tetl him as soon as possible all 
that had happened. 1 shall not enter the 
city of Vrishaparva. 

Vaishunpayana said 

26. Ghurnika speedily went to the 
palace of the Asura (chief). Finding the 
son of Kavi (Sukra), she spoke to him thus, 
her perception having been dimmed by 
anger. 


27. “O great Brahmana, O illustrious 
man, I tell you, Devayani has been illused by 
Sarmishta, the daughter of Vrishaparva, 

28. Having heard that his daughter had 
been illused by Sarmishta, he soon went to 
search for her with a heavy heart. 

29. And when he found her in the forest,  
the son of Kavi embraced her with affection, I 
and spoke to her with his voice choked with 
grief. 
Sukra said 

30. “The weal and woe that befall off 
people is always due to their' own faults. 
You had some fault, I am sure, which has 
been thus expiated. 

Devayani said. 

31. Be it punishment of my fault or not, 
(O father), hear all that the daughter of 
Vrishaparva, Sarmishta, had said to me. 

32. She has said, (I say) truly, that I 
you are a Bandi (hired chanter) of the  
Asura king. Even thus did Sarmishta,  
the daughter of Vrishaparva, speak 

33 These cruel and piercing words, 
with her eyes red (with anger). (She said), 
“You are the daughter of one who always 
chants the praise of others for hire, and 
who always asks for charity, 

34. And who accepts alms, whereas 
I am the daughter of one who is the adored 
of all, who gives alms and never receives any 
gift from any body.” thus again and again 
spoke to me Sarmishta, the daughter of  
Vrishaparva, full of pride, her eyes red in 
anger. 

35. O father, if I am really the daughter  
of a hired chaunter of others' praises, and of 
one who accepts alms, I must adore her in 
the hope of getting her favour. I have 
already told this to her. 

Sukra said 

36. O Devayani, you are not the daughter 
of a hired chaunter of praises, nor that of 
one who asks for alms and receives them- 
You are the daughter of one who is adored 
by all and who adores none. 

37. Vrishavarpa and lndra and king 
Yayati, (all) know my strength to be incon¬ 
ceivable like Brahma and unapproacable 
God. 

31. The Self created (Brahma) himself, 
being pleased with me said that I was the 
lord of that which was in all things on earth 
or in heaven. 

39. I tell you truly, that it is I who pour 
rain for the good of all, and nourish the 
annual plants that sustain all living crea¬ 
tures. 

Vaishampayana said 

40. It was thus with such sweet and 
sensible words, the father tried to pacify his 
angry and sorrowful daughter. 

thus ends the eighty seventh Section , 
the history of Yayati , in the Sambhava of 
th Adi Parva, 


Section 79

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Sukra said 

1. O Devayani, know that the man who 
does not regard the evil words of others, 
conquers every thing. 

2. The wise men call him a true chario¬ 
teer who holds tightly the reins of his 
horses. He is a true man who subdues 
his rising anger. 

3. O Devayani, know that he who subdues 
the rising anger by his feeling of non-anger, 
conquers everything on earth. 

4. He who subdues his rising anger by 
forgiveness like the casting off the Sough 
of a snake is called a true man. 

5. He who subdues his anger, he who 
does not regard the bad words of others, he 
who is not angry even when there is a 
cause, certainly acquires the four objects 
for which we live (namely Dharma, Artha 
Kama and Mohshai) 

6. Between the two men, one perform¬ 
ing sacrifices continually every month for 
one hundred years and one who does not 
feel any anger, the man who does not feel 
any anger is the greater man. 

7. Boys and girls, who are incapable of 
distinguishing between right and wrong, 
quarrel among one another. The wise 
never imitate them. 

Devayani said 

8. O father, I know, though I am a girl, 
what are duties and virtues. I also know 
the difference between anger and forgive¬ 
ness, and the power of each. 

9. But when a pupil behaves disrespect¬ 
fully towards his tutor, he should never be 
forgiven by the preceptor, if he wants to 
benifft him. therefore, I do not desire to 
live in a country where the people are 
so bad. 

10. The wise man who desires the good of 
all, should not live among men who are 
sinfully inclined, and who always speak ill of 
men of high birth and good behaviour. 

ti. It is said to be the best place to 
five where high birth and good conduct are 


known and respected, and where men know 
our birth and behaviour. 

is. The cruel words of the daughter of 
Vrishaparva bum my heart, as men, desirous 
of kindling a fire, bum the dry woods. 

13. I think nothing is more painful in the 
three worlds than to adore one’s enemies, 
who are blessed with good fortune, whereas 
he possesses none. Tne learned men have 
said that death would be preferable to such 
a man. 

thus ends the seventy ninth Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 80

(SAMBHABA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. The best of the Brigu race, the son ©i 
Kavi (Sukra) himself became angry. Com 
ing to the place where Vrishaparva, was 
seated, he fearlessly addressed him thus:— 

2. “O king, the sinful acts like the earth 
immediately do not bear fruit. But they do 
gradually and secretly cut away the roots of 
their doer. 

3. Such fruits are seen, either krone's 
ownself, or in one’s son,or in one's grandson. 
Sin must bear fruits, like rich food they can¬ 
not be digested. 

4. As you killed the grandson of Rishi 
Angirasha, the Brahmana Kacha, who was 
virtuous, learned in religious precepts, and 
attentive to duties, when he lived with 
me. 

5. As you have mal-treated my daughter 
who did not deserve it, O Vrishaparva 
know, I shall leave you and all your 
race. 

6. O king, for this reason I can no lon¬ 
ger stay here with you. Do not think, Q 
Danava, that I am raving or I am a liar. 
You think very little of your faults and do 
not try to correct them. 

Vrishaparva said 

7. O son of Brigu, never have I attribu¬ 
ted to you falsehood or impiety. Virtue 
and truth ever dwell in you. Be gracious to 
me. 

8. O son of Brigu, if you really leave me 
and go away (from this place), we shall have 
then to go into the deep bottom of the ocean. 
There is no other alternative for us 

Sukra said — 

9. O Asura, I care very little whether 
you go into the bottom of the sea, o 


120 


MAHABH ARATA. 


away to all directions. 1 am incapable of 
bearing my daughter’s grief. 

10. My life depends on her. Seek, O 
A suras, to please her. As Vrihaspati al¬ 
ways seeks the good of Indra, so I seek your 
good With my ascetic powers. 

Vrishaparva said 

i r. O son of Brigu, you are the absolute 
master of everything that belongs to the 
Asura chief in this world—these elephants, 
kine, and horses,—nay even myself. 

Sukra said 

12. O great Asura, if it is (really) true 
that I am the lord over all the wealth of the 
Asuras, then go and try to please Devayani. 

Vaishampayana said 

13. When the great son of Kavi (Sukra) 
was thus addressed by Vrishaparva, he went 
to Devayani, and the son of Brigu told 
her all. 

Devayani said 

14. O son of Brigu, O father, if you are 
really the lord over the Asura king and all 
his wealth, then let the king come personally 
to me and speak it in my presence. 

Vrishaparva said:— 

15. O Devayani, O lady of sweet smiles, 
whatever you desire to possess,—however 
difficult it may be to get,—1 am willing to 
give you. 

Dsvjani said 

16. I desire to have Sarmishta as my 
maid-servant with one thousand other dam¬ 
sels. She must also follow me to the house 
of him on whom my lather will bestow me. 

Vrishaparva said 

11. O nurse, go and bring quickly Sar- 
irashta here. Let her also act according to 
the desire of Devayani. 

Vaishampayana said 

18. The nurse then went to Sarmishta 
and told her, “O amiable Sarmishta, rise and 
follow me. 

19. Accomplish the good of your race. 
Urged by Devjant, the Brahmana (Sukra) 
is about to leave his disciples (the Asuras). 
O sinless lady, you roust do as Devjant 
desires.” 

Sarmishta said:— ' 

J shall cheerfully do as Devayani desires. 
Both Sukra and Devayani, must not leave the 
Asuras through any fault of mine. 


Vaishampayana said ’ 

21. Having been commanded by her 
father, Sarmishta with one thousand maid¬ 
ens came out of her father's excellent palace. 

Sarmishta said 

22. I am your maid-servatnt, with my 
one thousand maids. 1 shall follow you 
where your father will bestow you. 

Devayani said 

23. I am the daughter of one who is a 
hired chanter of praises, who asks for alms 
and accepts them, whereas you are the 
daughter of one who is adored. Why 
should you become my maid-servant ? 

Sarmishta said 

24. One must try to do good to one's 
afflicted relatives. therefore, I shall follow 
you where your father will bestow you. 

Vaishampayana said 

25. O best of kings, when Sarmishta 
thus promised to be the ma»d-servant of 
Devayani, she then thus spoke to her father. 

Devayani said 

26. O best of Brahmanas, O father, 
I am satisfied. I shall now enter the Asura 
capital. I know yonr science and power ol 
knowledge is not futile. 

Vaishampayana said 

27. Having been thus addressed by his 
daughter, that best of Brahmanas, that 
illustrious man entered the capital with all 
happiness, and be was worshipped by all the 
Danavas. 

thus ends the eightieth Section , the 
history of Yayati f in the Smmhhava of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 81

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O best of kings, after a long time the 
beautiful Devayani went to the same wood to 
sport. 

2. She reached the same spot with 
Sarmishta and her one thousand maids. 
She wandered about at pleasure. 

3. She felt herself very happy, being 
waited upon by these companions. They 
aH sported there, they drank the honey 
the flowers. 



AD! PARVA. 


t2t 


4  They ate various fruits.—(they threw 
Away many) after biting. The king (Yayati), 
the son of Nahusha in the course of his wan¬ 
derings for hunting again, 

5. Came there, tired and thirsty. Me 
Saw Devayani and Sarmishta and all those 
maidens. 

6. They Were all decked With beautiful 
ornaments and they were full of voluptuous 
langour on account of the honey they 
drank Devayani, of sWeet smiles was recli¬ 
ning at her ease. 

7. She was matchless in beauty and the 
frnost handsome of all the damsels. She 
Was waited upon by Sarmishta who was 
gently pressing her feet 

Yfcyati said 

8. O amiable ladies, it seems that these 
one thousands maids wait on you two. I 
Would ask you (to tell me) both your names 
and parentage. 

Devayani said 

9. O king, hear irtv Words. Know that 
l am the daughter of Sukra, the preceptor 
of the Asuras. 

10. This my companion is my maid 
—she will go wherever I shall go. She is 
Sarmishta, the daughter of the Asura king, 
Vrishaparva. 

Yayati said 

11. I am curious to know why this lady 
of fair eye-brows, this most beautiful 
damsel, this daughter of the Asura king, this 
your companion, is your maid-servant ? 

Devayani said 

12 . O best of kings, everything Comes to 
pass according to Fate. Do not he astoni¬ 
shed at this. Know it to be also the result of 
Kate. 

13. Your features and attire are both like 
a king. Your speech is also like the words 
of the Vedas. Tell me your name. Whence 
have you come t Whose son are you ? 

Yayati said 

14. In my BrahmacharyA, the whole of the 
Vedas entered mvears. I am a king, and a 
son of a king ; I am known as Yayatu 

Devayani said 

15. O king, why have you come here ? 
Is it to gather lotuses, or to angle, or to 
hunt. 

Yayati said 

16. O amiable lady, I was thirsty in the 
pursuit of deer. I have come here in search 

16 


of water. I wait but for your commands to 
leave this place 

Devayani said 

tj. Prosperity to you T Be my friend and 
husband. I wait for your Commands with 
my two thousand damsels and Sarmishta my 
maid-servant 

Yayati said 

18. O beautiful lady, I do not deserve 
you. You are the daughter of Sukra, (there¬ 
fore) you are far superior to me. O Devayani, 
your father cannot bestow you on even great 
king. 

Devayani said 

19. Brahmanas have already been mixed 
with Kshatriyas and Kshatriyas with Brah¬ 
mans. You are a son of a Rishi and a 
yourself a Rishi. therefore, O son of 
Nahusha, marry me 

Yayati said 

20. O beautiful lady, the four orders 
have no doubt sprung from one body. Biit 
they have different duties and virtues, which 
are not the same (for every order.) The 
Brahmanas are superior to all. 

Devayani said 

21—22. This hand of mine was never 
touched by any man except you. There¬ 
fore, I accept you as my husband. HoW 
will any other man touch my hand which 
is touched by you who are a Rishi ? 

Yayati said 

23. The wise men know that a Brahmana 
is more to be avoided than an angry and 
virulently poisonous snake or a blazing 
arid flaming fire 

Devayani said s— 

241 O best of men t why do yOU say that 
a Brahmana is to be Avoided like An 
angry and virulently poisonous snake, or a 
blazing and flaming fire ? 

Yayati said 

25. The snake kilts only wie The shar- 
pest weapon kills but a single person. But 
the Brahmana if angry destroys many 
cities And kingdoms. 

261 therefore, O beautiful lady, I think 
that Brahmanas should be avoided more than 
the two, (the snake and the fire) O amiable 
lady, 1 cannot marry you, unless your father 
bestows you on me. 

Devjam said-

27 You are chosen by the O king, it 
is then settled that you will accept me if 
my father bestows you on me. You neod 
not fear to accept my humble self, if bestowed 
on you. You have not asked for me, 

Vaishampayana said 

28. Devayani quickly sent a maid-servant 
to her father. The maid told Sukra all that 
had happened. 

29. Having heard this, the son of Brigu 
went to see the king. The king of the world 
Yayati, seeing that Sukra was coming, 
bowed to him. He worshipped and adored 
that Brahmana, and stood before him with 
joined hands to receive his commands. 

Devayani said 

30. O father, this is the son of Nahusha. 
He took hold of my hand when I was in 
difficulty (thrown into the well). Bestow me 
on him. I shall not marry any other man 
in the world. 

Sukra said 

31. O splendidly courageous king, you 
have been accepted by my dear daughter 
as her husband. I bestow her on you. 
therefore, O son of Nahusha, accept her 
as your wife. 

Yayati said 

32. O Brahmana, I solicit the boon 
by which the sin of my begetting a mixed 
caste may not touch me. 

Sukra said 

33. I shall absolve you from the sin (of 
begetting a mixed caste). Fear not to marry 
her. 1 grant you absolution. 

34. Maintain virtuously your wife, 
Devayani of beautiful slender waist. Let great 
happiness be yours in her company. 

35. O king, this maiden, Sarmishta, the 
daughter of Vrishaparva, should always be 
respected by you. But you tnust not call her 
to your bed. 

Vaishampayana said 

36. Having been thus addressed by 
Sukra, the king walked round the Brahmana. 
The king then performed - the auspicious 
ceremony of marriage according to the 
rites of the ordinance. 

37. Having received from Sukra a rich 
treasure in Devayani with Sarmishta and two 
thousand maidens. 

38. That be9t of kings, being duly 
honoured by Sukra and the Asuras, returned 
11 his capital, after receiving the commands 
01 the illustrious son of Brigu. 

thus ends the eighty •first Section , the 
h : %torv of Vayili, in the S amhhava of the 
AJi Parva. 


Section 82

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Yayati, then coming to his capital 
which was like that of Indra, entered the 
inner-apartment and installed Devayani there. 

2. At the request of Devayani, he esta¬ 
blished the daughter of Vrishaparva in a 
house which be caused to be erected in the 
Asoka groves of his gardens. 

3. The king honored the daughter of 
Vrishaparva, Sarmishta, surrounded by her 
one thousand maids, by making every 
arrangement for her food and garments. 

4. The king, the son of Nahusha, ha£pdy 
passed many years in the company of Devayani. 

5. The beautiful lady, Devayani condeved 
when her season came. She gave birth to 
her eldest child which was a boy. 

6. When one thousand years had passed 
away, Sarmishta, the daughter of Vrisha¬ 
parva, attained her puberty, and her season  
came. She (therefore) began to ponder. 

7. (She said to herself),—"My season 
has come. But I have not yet chosen a 
husband. What would happen ? What 
should I do ? How am I to accomplish my 
wishes ? 

8. Devayani has given birth to a son. My 
youth is in vain. 1 shall choose him as my 
nuSband Whom Devayani has chosen. 

9. The king should give me a son. This 
is a firm resolve. Will not that virtuous- 
minded king grant me a private interview 7 

10. (One day) the king listlesly came to 
the Asoka grove, and seeing Sarmishta 
he stood before her. 

11. Sarmishta, of sweet smiles, finding 
the king alone before her, thus addressed the 
king with joined hands. 

Sarmishta said 

12. O son of Nahusha, none can see the 
ladies that dwell in the inner-apartments of 
Soma, Indra, Vishnu, Yama, Varuna and 
your own. 

13. O king, you know that I am hand¬ 
some and well-born. O great king. I solicit 
you. My season ha$_come. See that it 
goes not in vain. 

Yayati said:— 

14. 1 know very well the great birth of 
yours, born as you are in the race of the Da- 
navas. You are also exceedingly beautiful. 

1 do not find the least defect in ybur 
beauty. 

15. L’sanas, the son of Kavi, however, 
commanded me when 1 was married tp 


L 



ADI PARVA. 


Deviani thit Vrishaparva’s daughter shall 
not oe called to my bed. 

Sarmishta said:— 

16. It is not sinful to speak falsehood in 
the following five cases, namely in joke, in 
respect of women to be associated with, in 
marriage, in prospect of immediate death, 
and at the time of the loss of one's whole for¬ 
tune. 

17. O king, it is not true that he is fallen 
who does not speak out the truth when asked 
(for there are occasions when to speak false¬ 
hood is an act of piety.) The falsehood is 
sinful when one (harmful) object is to be 
accomplished. 

Yayati said 

18. A king should be a model prince in the 
eyes of his people. That king who speaks 
falsehood is sure to meet with bis destruction. 
I do not dare to speak a lie, though thc a 
greatest losses threaten me. 

Sarmishta said:— 

19. O king, you have been chosen by my 
friend as her husband. One's friend's marri¬ 
age is the same as one's own. You are, 
therefore, as much my husband (as Dev- 
jani’s). 

Yayati said:— 

20. It is one of my strict vow? no doubt 
that I should grant what is asked of me. 
You ask me (to grant you a favour) 
therefore, tell me what should I do ? 

Sarmishta said:— 

21. O king, save me from sin. Protect 
my virtue. Becoming a mother by you, let 
me perform the greatest pious act in the 
world. 

22. O king, it is ordained that three per¬ 
sons can never earn wealth for themselves. 
They are the wife, the slave and the son. 
That which they earn belong to him who 
owns them. 

23. O king, I am the slave of Devayani, 
the lady of the Brigu race. You are Uev- 
jani's master and lord. therefore, you are 
my master and lord as well. I solicit you. 
Fulfill my wishes. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

24. thus having been addressed by 
Sarmishta, the king was persuaded to believe 
that what she said was true. He fulfilled 
Sarmishta's wishes and thus protected her 
virtue. 

25. They passed some time together. 
They took affectionate farewell of each other 
and separated. Each went, W’hence tliey 
came. 


123 

26. Sarmishta of sweet smiles and fair 
eye-brows conceived in consequence of that 
connection with that best of kings. 

27. O king, in due time the lotus-eyed 
lady (Sarmishta) gave birth to a son, as 
effulgent as a celestial child and with eyes 
like lotus leaves. 

thus ends the eighty second Section , the 
history of Yayati , in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 83
(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued, 

Vaishampayana said;— 

1. O descendant of the Bharata race/ 
when Devayani heard of the birth of this boy, 
she became very sorry, and Sarmishta be¬ 
came an object of her sad reflections. Going 
to Sarmishta, Devayani thus spoke to her! 

Devayani said:— 

2. O girl of fair-eyc-brows, what sin is 
this you have committed out of lust! 

Sarmishta said:— 

3. A Rishi of virtuous mind, learned in 
the Vedas, came to me. He was capable 
of granting boons, and he was solicited by 
me to grant my wishes based on virtue. 

4. O lady of sweet smiles, I would never 
seek the fulfillment of my desires by sinful 
means. I tell you truly, this my child was 
begotten by a Rishi. 

Devayani said:— 

5. O timid maiden, it is all right if that 
is the case. Jf you know the lineage, the 
name and the family of that Brahmana, 
tell me I wish to hear them. 

Sarmishta said:— 

6. O lady of sweet smiles, that Rishi 
was as effulgent in asceticism and energy as 
the sun. Seeing him, I had no power of 
making these enquiries. 

Devayani said:— 

7. O Sarmishta, If this be true, if you 
have received this your son from such a 
great Brahmana, 1 liave then no cause for 
anger. 

Vaishampayana Mid:— 

8. They talked and laughed with each 
other, and then they separated, (Devayani) 
the daughter of the Vrigti race going to her 
mansion and believing what Sarmishta told 
her. 

9. O king, Yayati begot on Devayani two 
more sons (namely) Yadu and Turvasu, 
who were like Indra and Vishnu. 

10. The daughter of Vrishaparva, Sarmishta, 
by that royal sage gave birth to three 
sons in all, namely Dranyu, Anu and Puru. 

11. O king, one day Devayani of sweet 
smiles went,with Yayati into a solitary part 
of the royal park. 

12. There she saw three children of 
celestial beauty, playing with perfect ease. 
She was surprised, ana thus spoke to the 
king. 

Devayani said— 

13. O king, whose children are these, so 
handsome, so like the children of the celestials ? 
They are exactly like you in splendour and beauty. 

14. Having asked the king, she asked 
the children. 

Devayani said :— 

15. O children, what is your lineage! 
Who is your father ? Answer me truly. I 
desire to know all. 

Vaishamapayana said 

16. The children then pointed to the 
king with their fingers and said that Sar¬ 
mishta was their mother. 

17. Having said this, they came to the 
king to clasp nis knees. But tne king dared 
not carress them before Devayani. 

18. The boys wept in grief, and they left 
the place, going towards their mother. The 
king became very much abashed of this 
conduct of the boys. 

19. Seeing the affection of the boys to¬ 
wards the king, (Devayani understood all. 
And she addressed Sarmishta thus;— 

Devayani said 

20. How have you dared to do me an 
injury, dependant as you are on me ? Do 
you not fear to have recourse once more to 
your Asura conduct ? 

Sarmishta said 

21. O lady of sweet smiles, all that I 
told you about the Rishi is quite true. 
My acts were according to the precepts of 
virtue and right. 

22. Therefori, I am not afraid of you. 
When you chose the king as your husband, 
I too did the same. O beautiful lady, a 
friend's husband is one's own husband ac¬ 
cording to the precepts of religion. 

23. You are a daughter of a Brahmana, 
and therefore you deserve my greatest wor¬ 
ship and regard. Do you not know that 
this royal sage (Yayati) is the object of 
greater esteem to me ? 

Vaishampayana said:— 

24. Having heard these words, Devayani 
said, " O king, you have wronged me, I wOf 
not live here any longer." 

25. Having said this, she with tearful 
eyes quickly rose to go away to her father. 
And the king was grieved to see her thus 
angry. 

26. He became very much alarmed; 
and he followed her, trying to appease her 
wrath. But she did not return. Her eyes 
were red in anger, 

27. She did not speak a word to the king, 
but she, with her eyes full of tears, soon 
reached her father, Usanas, the son of 
Kavi. 

28. Seeing her father, she made to him 
due salutation and stood before him. Yayati 
also came immediately after her, and he 
saluted and worshipped the son of Brigu. 

Devayani said:— 

29. O father, virtue has been defeated 
by vice. The low have risen and the high 
have fallen. I have been insulted by the 
daughter of Vrishaparva. 

30. Three sons have been begotten on 
her by this king Yayati. O father, unfortu¬ 
nate am I ! I nave got only two sons. 

31. O son of Brigu, this king is renown¬ 
ed for his knowledge in religion and virtue. 
But, O son of Kavi, I tell you, he has fallen 
from the path of virtue. 

Sulcra said 

32. O king, as you have made vice your 
favourite pursuit, though well-acquainted 
with the precepts of virtue, terrible decrepi¬ 
tude will overtake you. 

Tayati said:— 

33. Adorable Rishi, I was solicited by the 
daughter of the Danava king to make her 
season fruitful. I did grant her prayer from 
a sense of virtue. 

34. O Rishi, men learned in the Vedas 
say that he, who does not grant the pray¬ 
er of a woman in season, commits the sin of 
killing an embryo. 

35. He, who, being solicited in secret by 
a woman full of desire and in season, does 
not grant her wishes, loses virtue. The 
learned say that he becomes a killer of 
embryo. 

36. O son of Brigu, for these reasons, 
and being afraid of committing a sin, 1 went 
to Sarmishta. 



ADI PARVA. 


125 


Sukra said:— 

37. O king, you are dependent on me. 
You should have waited to receive my com¬ 
mand. O son of Nahusha, having acted 
falsely in the matter ofvour duty, you have 
committed the sin of theft. 

V&i shampayana said 

38. thus being cursed by the angry 
Usanas, Yayati, tne son of bfahusha, was 
then deprived of his youth, and terrible de¬ 
crepitude soon overcame him. 

Yayati said:— 

39. O son of Brigu, I have not been as 
yet satiated with youth or Devayani. There¬ 
fore, O Brahmana, be graceful to me. Let 
not decrepitude overcome me. 

Sukra said:— 

40. I never speak an untruth. O king, 
(see), you have been immediately attacked 
by old age. But if you like, you can trans¬ 
fer this decrepitude to some other man. 

Yayati said:— 

41. O Brahmana, let this be ordered by 
you that, the son of mine who will accept 
my this old age will enjoy my kingdom and 
gain both virtue and fame. 

Sukra said:— 

42. O son of Nahusha. remembering me 
you will be able to transfer your this decre¬ 
pitude to whomever you like. 

43. Your that son who will give you 
bis youth will become your successor on the 
throne. He will have long life, wide-spread 
fame and a large progeny. 

thus ends the eighty third Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 84
(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Having been thus attacked by old age, 
Yayati returned to his capital. He summon¬ 
ed his eldest and accomplished son Yadu 
and thus spoke to him. 

Yayati said:— 

2. O child ; old age, wrinkles and white 
hair have come over to me by the curse 
the son of Kavi who is called Usanas. But 
I am not yet satiated with youth. 

3. O Yadu, take you upon yourself my 
this decrepitude and consequent old age. I 
shall then enjoy with your youth. 


4. When one thousand years will be com¬ 
pleted, I shall return to you your youth and 
take back my decrepitude and its consequent 
weakness. 

Yadu said:— 

5. There are many inconveniences in 
old age about eating and drinking. 
therefore, O king, I shall not take your 
decrepitude upon me. This is my determi¬ 
nation. 

6. White hair, cheerlessness, relaxation 
of nerves, wrinkles all over the body, defor¬ 
mities, weakness, leanness, inability of work, 
these are the consequences of decrepitude. 
Even friends and dependants forsake an 
old decrepit man, 

7. O king, you have many sons, some of 
them are dearer to you (than I.) O virtuous 
man, ask some other son of yours to take 
upon him your decrepitude. 

Yayati said:— 

8. O son, you have sprung from my 
heart, but you do not give me your youth. 
therefore, your children will never be ruling 
kings. 

9. O Turvasu, take upon yourself my 
decrepitude and consequent weakness. I 
wish to enjoy the pleasures of life with your 
youth. 

10. After the expiration of one thousand 
years, I shall return, to you, your youth, and 
take back my decrepitude and its consequent 
weakness. 

Turvasu said:— 

11. O father, I do not like old age. It 
destroys all pleasures and enjoyments, 
strength and beauty, the intellect and the 
memory,—nay even life. 

Yayati said:— 

12. You are born from my heart, but 
you do not give me your youth. therefore, 
O Turvasu, your line will be extinct. 

13—15. You shall be the foolish king 
of those whose practices and precepts win 
be impure, whose women of superior birth 
will give birth to children by inert of Inferior 
birth, who will live on meat, who will be 
mean, who will not hesitate to appropriate 
the wives of their superiors, who will be 
like birds and beasts in their practices, and 
who will be sinful and Mlechas. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

16. Having thus cursed his son Turvasu, 
Yayati spoke to Sarmishta's son Drahyu 
thus 

Yayati said:— 

17. O Drahyu, take upon yourself for 
one thousand years my decrepitude, destruc- 



126 


mahabharata. 


tive of beauty and complexion. Give me 
your youth. 

f 8. After the expiration of one thousand 
years, I shall return to you your youth and 
. take back my own decrepitude. 

Drahyn laid:— 

19. O king, one, if he is decrepit, cannot 
enjoy elephants, cars, horses or women. His 
voice also becomes indistinct. therefore, 
I do not desire (to take upon myself) your 
old age. 

Yayati »aid:— 

20. O son, you are sprung from my 
heart, but you refuse to give me 
your youth. therefore, your cherished 
wishes will never be fulfilled. 

21—22. You shall be a king only in name. 
You shall rule over a region where there will 
be no roads, no passages for horses, cars, 
elephants, asses, goats, bullocks, planquins 
ana other good vehicles, where the only 
means of locomotion will be rafts and floats. 
In such a place you will live with all your 
friends. 

23. O Anu, take my decrepitude and its 
consequent weakness. I shall enjoy the 
pleasures of life for one thousand years with 
your youth. 

Ann said 

24. Those that are decripit eat like chil¬ 
dren , and they are always impure. They 
cannot pour libations on sacrificial fire at 
the proper time. therefore, I do not like to 
take upon myself your old age. 

Yayati said 

25. O son, you have sprung from my 
heart, but you do not give me your youth. 
As you find so many faults with decrepitude, 
decrepitude will overcome you. 

26. Your sons will die as soon as 
they will attain to their youth. You shall 
not be able to perform any sacrifice before 
fire. 

27. O Puru, you are my youngest and 
dearest son, you will become the foremost of 
them. OW age, wrinkles and white hair, 
O child, have come over me, 

28. On account of the curse of the son of 
Kavi, who is called Usanas. But I am 
not vet satiated with youth. O Puru, take 
my decrepitude upon you, and consequent 
weakness. I shall enjoy the pleasures of life 
for one thousand years with your youth. 

29. After the expiration of one thousand 
years, 1 shall return to you your youth and 
take back my own decrepitude. 


Vaishampayana said •— 

30. Having been thus addressed by the 
king, Puru replied to him with all humility. 
('He said : ) “ O great king, 1 shall do as 
you command me to do. 

31. O king, I shall take upon myself 
your old age and its consequent w'eakness. 
Take my youth and enjoy as you like the 
pleasures of life. 

32. Attacked by your old age, depri¬ 
ved of youth and beauty, I shall at your 
command live and give you my youth.” 

Yayati said 

33. O Puru, my child, I am much pleas¬ 
ed with you. 1 grant you the following boon 
with great pleasure. The people of your 
kingdom will have all their desires ful¬ 
filled. 

Vaishampayana said 

34. Having said this, Yayati remember¬ 
ed the great ascetic, the son of Kavi(Sukra), 
and transfered his decrepitude to the body 
of the high-souled Puru. 

thus ends the eighty fourth Section , the 
history of Yayati in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva. 


Section 85

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Having thus received the youth of 
Puru, Yayati the son of Nabusha, that best 
of kings, was exceedingly delighted. He 
again indulged in the pleasures of life. 

2. He enjoyed himself to the full extent 
of his desires and to the full limit of Vis 
powers, as much as he desired and as the 
seasons called forth. But, O king, he did 
nothing against the precepts of religion. 

3. He pleased the celestials by perfor¬ 
ming sacrifices, the Pitris by Sradhas , the 
poor by charities and the good Brahmanas 
by fulfilling their desires. 

4. The guests by food and drink, the 
Vaisyas by protection, the Sudras by 
kindness and the robbers by proper punish¬ 
ments. 

5. Yayati pleased all classes of his sub¬ 
jects by ruling over them virtuously like 
Indra. 

6. That king was as powerful as the liop. 
He was young, and enjoyed all the pleasures 
of life. He enjoyed unlimited Happiness 
without violating the precepts of religion. 

7. The king (Yayati) became exceedingly 
happy in thus being able to enjoy all the 



ADI PARVA. 


127 


best objects of enjoyments. That king of 
men was only sorry (in remembering) that 
one thousand years would soon come to an 
end. 

8. That royal sage, learned in the 
mystery of time and possessed of great 
prowess, having obtained youth for one 
thousand years and watching proper 
Kalas and Kashtas 

9. Sported with Vishwachi (Apsara), 
some time in the garden (of lndra) 
Nandana , sometimes in Atoka, and some¬ 
times on the summit of the Meru Mountain. 

10. That virtuous king then found that 
the fixed time (one thousand) years had come 
to an end. He then called Puru and ad¬ 
dressed him thus. 

Yayati said — 

11. O son, O chastiser of foes, I have en¬ 
joyed with your youth to the full extent of 
my desires and to the full limit of my powers 
and all according to their seasons. 

12. But desires never die. They are never 
satiated by indulgence. By indulgence 
they flame up like the sacrificial fire with 
Ghee poured into it. 

13. If one becomes the sole lord of all 
the earth with its paddy, oats, gems, 
beasts and women, still it will not be con¬ 
sidered by him enough. therefore, the 
thirst for enjoyment, should be abandoned. 

14. The thirst (of enjoyments), which is 
difficult to be oast off by the wicked, which 
docs not fail even with failing life, is truly 
a fatal disease in man. To get rid of this 
thirst is real happiness. 

15. My mind was attached to the pleas¬ 
ures of life for full one thousand years. My 
thirst for them, however, without being 
abated, is daily being increased. 

16. therefore, 1 shall get rid of it. I shall 
fix my mind on Brahma, and becoming 
peaceful and having no attachment, I shall 
pass the rest of my days in the forest with 
the innocent deer. 

17. O Puru, I am exceedingly pleased 
with you. Take (back) your own youth. 
Prosperity be to you. Receive my king¬ 
dom. You are my son who has done my 
favourite work. 

Vaishampayana said 

18. Yayati, the son of Nahusha, then 
received back his own old age, and his son 
Puru also received back his youth. 

19. Yayati became desirous of installing 
his youngest son Puru on the throne. But 
the four orders of his subject with Brahma- 
nas at their head thus addressed him, 

20. “ O lord, how can you install Puru 
on the throne, passing over your eldest son 


Yadu, born of Devayani and grandson of 
Sukra ? 

21. Yadu is your eldest son, after him 
was born Turvasu. Then Sarmishta’s son 
Drahyu, Anu, and last Puru. 

22. How it would be proper to pass over 
all the elders and install the youngest ? We 
represent this to you,—act according to the 
precepts of religion. 

Yayati said 

23. Hear all of yon of the four orders of 
the caste with the Brahmanas at their head, 
why my kingdom should not be given to my 
eldest son. 

24. My commands were disobeyed by 
my eldest son. The opinion of the wise 
men is that the son who disobeys his father 
is no son at all. 

25. The son who obeys the commands of 
his father and mother, who is humble and a 
well-wisher of his parents and who loves 
them, is the best of sons. 

36. I have been slighted by Yadu, and 
Turvasu; much have 1 been slighted by 
Drahyu ancl Anu. 

27. Only Puru obeyed my commands, 
and much have 1 been honoured and respec¬ 
ted by him. He accepted my old age, and 
therefore, though he is the youngest, yet be 
should be made king. 

28. Puru is a great friend of mine and 
he did what was agreeable to me. And 
the son of Kavi, Usanas, Sukra himself, 
granted me this boon. 

29. The son who would obey me would 
become the king and the lord of the earth. 
therefore, I entreat you, let Puru be in¬ 
stalled on the throne. 

The people said 

30. O king, it is true thati the son who 
is accomplished and who seeks the good of 
his parents, deserves all prosperity, though 
he is the youngest. 

31. therefore, Puru, who has done good 
to you, deserve, to have the kingdom. As 
Sukra has granted this boon, wc have no 
power to say any thing. 

Vaishampayana said 

32. Having been thus addressed by the 
contented people the sou of Nahtisha 
(Yayati) installed his son Puru on the 
throne. 

33. Bestowing the kingdom on Puru, he 
resolved to live in the forest, and he left his 
capital with Brahmanas and ascetics. 

34. The sons of Yadu are known as the 
Yadavas, those of Turvasu as the Yavanas, 
those of Drhyu as the Bhojas, and those 
of Anu as the Miechas, 



MAHABHAKATA. 


35. Those of Purn as the Pauravas, in 
which dynasty, O king-, you are bora to 
rule the_country for one thousand years. 

thus ends the eighty fifth Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva. 


Section 86

(SHAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayaaa said 

1. Having thus installed his dear son 
Puru on the throne, the son of Nahusha 
king Yayati, became very happy and ac¬ 
cepted the Vanaprastha mode of life 

2- He lived in the forest with the Brah- 
manas, becoming self-controlled, and living 
on fruits and roots. thus patiently bearing 
privations of all sorts, he at last ascended 
to heaven. 

3. Having thus ascended heaven, the 
king lived there in bliss. But some time 
after, he was hurled down (from heaven) 
by Indra. 

4. I have heard that having thus fallen 
from heaven, he stayed in the sky and did 
not fall on the earth. 

5. I have heard that some time after, he 
again ascended heaven in company with 
greatly powerful Vasumana, Ashtaka, Pra- 
tardhana and ShibL 

Jaaaatejaya said:— 

6. 1 desire to hear in detail why' that 
king, after entering heaven, was hurled down 
from it, and why he again gained admit¬ 
tance. 

7. O Brahmana, let this be narrated by 
before all these B rahman a Rtshis. 
lord of the earth Yayati was like die 

king of the celestials (Indra) ; 

8. He was the progenitor of the exhaustive 
Kura race ; he was as effulgent as the sun. 
He was illustrious, world-wide famous and a 
man of wonderful achievements. I desire to 
hoar m full the story' of his life both here 
in this world and in heaven. 

Vaisbampayana said 

9. 1 shall narrate to yam the excellent 
history of Yayati’s exploits both here on 
earth and in heaven. The story is sacred, 
and it destroys all the sins of those that 
hear it. 

10. The son of Nahusha. king Yayati, 
having installed his youngest son Puru on 
the throne, went to the forest to lead the 
life of a red use. 


11. He passed over the claims of frfr 
other sons with Vadu at their head, and he 
lived in the forest oil fruits and roots. 

12. He brought his mind and his pas¬ 
sions under complete control. He pleased 
the Pitris and Celestials by performing 
sacrifices. He poured libatioris according to 
the prescribed rites of inert leading the 
Vanaprastha, 

13. The illustrious king entertained the 1 
guests and strangers with fruits of the 
forest and Ghee . He supported hiittsetf 
by eating only the scattered corn seeds. 

14—16. The king thus passed full one 
thousand years. He observed the vow of 
silence with his mind under complete control. 
He passed full one year in fasting, living on 
air alone and having no sleep. He passed 
another one year in the midst of four fires 
and the burning sun overhead. He stood 
for six months continually on one 
(Having thus passed his life in austere 
penances), the king, (Yayati) the doer of 
sacred deeds, ascended heaven. 

thus ends tiie eighty six Section , the his¬ 
tory of Yayati, in the Sambhava of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section 87

(SHAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued, 

Vaighampayana. said s— 

1. When that great lemg as living i» 
heaven, he was adored try the celestials, the 
Sadhyas , the Marutas , and the Vasus. 

2. That doer of pknis acts (Yayati) often 
went from the region of the celestials to the 
region of Brahma. It is heard that he lived 
in heaven for a long time. 

3. One day the best of kings, Yayati, 
went to Indra, and in the course of conversa¬ 
tion the lord of earth was asked by Indra. 

Indra said:— 

4. O long, what did you say when Pun 
took your old age on earth and when you 
gave him his kingdom ? 

Yayati said 

5. ! told him the whole c am tr y between 
the rivers Ganges and the 1 ««nm which is 
in fact the central region of the earth, is 
thine. Your brothers will have (he outly¬ 
ing regions. 

6. 1 told frim, the men having no anger 
are superior to men with anger; men having 
forgiveness are superior to men having no 
forg iv eness. Man is superior to antmak. 
and the learned to the ignorant. 




ADI PARVA. 


129 


7 If wronged, you should not wrong in 
return. One’s anger, if not subdued, burns 
one’s own self. If subdued, it procures the 
virtues of the doers of good acts. 

8. You should never give pain to others 
by cruel words. Never defeat your enemies 
by despicable means. Never utter such 
sinful and burning words as may give pain 
to others. 

9. He who pricks another by the thorns 
of cruel words holds in his mouth a persecut¬ 
ing Rakshasa. Lakshmi (prosperity) leaves 
the man who casts his eyes on even such a 
man. 

10. You should always keep the virtuous 
man before you as your model. You should 
always compare your acts with those of the 
virtuous. You should always disregard the 
cruel words of the wicked. 

11. He who keeps the arrows of cruel 
words in his lips weeps day and night. 
The cruel words strike at the inmost part of 
the body. The wise men never fling such 
arrows (of cruel words) at others. 

12. There is nothing in the three 
worlds with which you can worship 
the deties as kindness, friendship, charity 
and sweet words. 

13. therefore, you should always utter 
sweet words that give pleasure and not 
pain. You should always give and never 
beg. You should show respects to those that 
deserve your respect. 

thus ends the eighty seventh Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sanitihavu of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 88
(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Con tinned. 

Indra said:— 

1. O king, O son of Nahusha, O Yayati, 
after accomplishing all your duties, you 
went to the forest, leaving your home. 1 ask 
you,—tell me like whom you arc in ascetic 
merits. 

Tayati said 

2. O Vasava (Indra), I do not find 
among men, the celestials, the Gandhar- 
vas and great Rishis, any one equal to me in 
ascetic merits. 

Indra said 

3. O k;ng, as you disregard those that 
are vour superiors, those that are your 
equals, and those that are your inferiors, 
your virtues, therefore, suffer a diminution, 
and thus you must fall from heaven. 


Yayati said 

4. O king of the celestials, if my virtues 
have really been diminished (by my pride), 
let me fall at least among men wno are 
virtuous and honest. 

Indra said 

5. O king, you shall fall among those 
that are virtuous and honest. You shall also 
gain great renown; O Yayati, after your 
this experience, never again disregard any 
one your superiors, your equals or even 
your inferiors. 

Vaishampay ana said 

6. Thereupon Yayati fell from the region 
of the holy. And he was seen when thus 
falling by that royal sage, As taka, the pro¬ 
tector of religion. Seeing him he asked. 

As taka said'— 

7. Who are you, young as you are, as 
handsome as Indra, as prominent by your 
own splendour as that of fire T Who are you 
falling like the foremost ranger of the 
sky, the sun, driving away the dark masses 
of clouds ? 

8. Seeing you fall from the region of the 
sun, as effulgent as the fire or the sun, 
all men are asking themselves, “What is 
this that falls ?” They are deprived of 
their conciousness, 

9. Seeing you in the path of the celestials, 
as effulgent as Surja, Indra, or Vishnu, we 
have all come to you to ascertain the truth. 

10. O enviably handsome one, we would 
not have been guilty of incivility' by first 
asking you who you are, if you would have 
asked us first who we are. We ak you, 
(tell us) who you are, and why you come 
here. 

ri. O Indra-like great one, let your 
fears be dispelled, let your woes and afflic¬ 
tions erase. You are now in the presence 
of the virtuous and the wise. Even Indra, 
the slayer of Vala, cannot do you any 
harm. 

12. O Indra-like great one, the honest 
and the virtuous are the support of their 
brethern. Here are assembled the protec¬ 
tors of the movables and the immovables 
of the world.—the honest and the virtuous. 
You are now with such ones. 

13. As Agni is the lord that gives heat, 
as earth is the lord that holds the seed (and 
produces corn), as sun is the lord that dispels 
darkness, so is a guest the lord of the honest 
and the virtuous. 

thus ends the eigiity eighth Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sainbhara of the 
Adi Parva . 


1 7 



MAHABHARATA. 


130 


Section 89

(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Yayati said.— 

1. I am Yayati, the son of Nahusha and 
the father of Puru. I am falling down from 
the region of the celestials, the Siddhas and 
the Rjshis, for the diminution of my virtues. 
(I am falling), because I disregarded every 
creature on earth. 

2. As I - am older than you in age, I did 
not salute you first. He who is older in 
age or superior in learning or asceticism is 
revered by Brahmanas. 

Astaka said 

3. . O king you say that he, who is older 
in years, deserves the respect and reverence 
of others. But it is said that he is truly 
worthy of respect who is superior in learning 
and asceticism. 

Yayati said 

4. It i$ said that sin destroys the merit of 
ail virtuous acts. Vanity contains the element 
of that which leads to hell. The virtuous 
never follow the path of the sinful, 

5. They act in a way as to increase 
their virtue. 1 myself had great religious 
merits, but all is now gone. I shall never be 
able to regain them with my best efforts. 
He, who will take lesson from my this fate, 
will be wise and virtuous. 

6. He who, having acquired great wealth' 
performs sacrifices, who, having acquired al l 
kinds of learning, remains humble, who, 
having studied the entire Vedas, dievotes 
himself to asceticism, goes to heaven. 

7. No one should be proud of his great 
wealth , no one should feel exalted, because 
he has studied the entire Vedas. Men are of 
different dispositions in the world, but 
Destiny is supreme. Power and exertion 
arc both futile and useless. Knowing Destiny 
to be supreme (over all), the wise should 
neither feel pride nor grief. 

8. Remembering that Destiny is supreme 
(over all), creatures should know that happi¬ 
ness and mysery depend on Destiny, and 
not bn their own exertion and power. 

0. The wise should always live con¬ 
tented, without grieving for mysery or 
exalting for happiness. When Destiny is 
supreme, both grief and exaltation are use¬ 
less. 

10. O Astaka, I never fed terrified with 
fear, nor do I ever feel grief, for I know that 
1 shall be on earth exactly what the great 
Ordainer has made me. 

11. The Insects, the worms, all theovipa- 
rousc reatures, vegetables, crawling animals, 


vermins, fishes, stones, grass, wood,—in fact 
all created things,—are united with the 
Prakiti when they are freed from their acts. 

12. Happiness and miseiy are transitory. 
O Astaka, knowing this, why should I grieve T 
W« never know how we are to act to avoid 
misery'. therefore, grief must be cast off. 

Vaishampayana said 

13. King Yayati, possessed of every 
accomplishment, who was the maternal 
grandfather of Astaka, was again asked by 
him to tell him the account of his living in 
heaven. 

Astaka said:— 

14. O king of the world, fell me in 
detail the account of all those regions which 
you have visited and in which you passed 
your time in bliss. (Tell me also) the 
period for which you thus lived. 

Yayati said 

15. I was a great king on earth, ruling 
over the whole world as my kingdom. I 
acquired many high regions by my 
religious merits. I lived full one thousand 
years on earth, and then I ascended to a 
very high region. 

16. It is the abode of Indra. It is very 
beautiful ; it has one thousand gates, and it 
extends one hundred Yoyanas all around. 
Here lived I fer another one thousand years. 
And then I ascended to a higher region. 

17. This is the region of supreme beati¬ 
tude,—the abode of the Prajapati, the lord 
of the earth,—a region veiy difficult to attain. 
Here lived I for another one thousand years. 
And I then ascended to a higher region. 

18. It is the abode of the god of 
gods, (Vishnu), where I lived for many 
years in supreme bliss. I have lived in vari¬ 
ous regions, and 1 was adored by the 
celestials, and I possessed splendour and 
prowess like the celestials. 

19. 1 was capable of assuming 
any form at will; I sported for many milli¬ 
ons of years with the Apsaras in the gardens 
of Nandana, under innumerable beautiful 
trees clad in flowery garb and spreading 
delicious perfume. 

20. I lived th$re in celestial happiness 
for many many years, when a celestial mes¬ 
senger of grim vissage thrice ' shouted to mi 
in a loud and deep voice, ' Ruined, Rttimd, 
Ruined." 

21. O best of kings, this much I remem¬ 
ber that I fell from Nandana, and ail my 
religious merits were gone. O king 
I heard the voices of the celestials in the sky 
exclaiming in grief, 

22. "What misfortune! The virtuous and 
meritorious Yayati is falling! His all religi 
ous merits are destroyed !” And when 1 was 
falling, I asked them, "Where are those wise 
ones amongst whom am I to fall"

23. They pointed out to me this sacred 
sacrificial region belonging to you. I am 
hastely coming to this your sacrificial 
ground, seeing the curls of smoke that rise 
from the sacrificial fire and blacken the sky. 
I smelt the perfume of the sacrificial 
ghee . 

thus ends the eighty ninth Section , the 
history of Yayati, tn the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 90 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued, 

Astaka said 

t. O foremost man‘of the Krita Yuga, 
you,'having been able to assume any form 
at will, passed millions of years in the 
garden of Nandana. For what reason have 
you been compelled to leave that happy region 
and come here to-day ? 

Yayati said 

2. As relatives and kinsmen forsake in 
this world a man who has lost his wealth, so 
in the other world Indra and the celestials 
forsake one who loses his righteousness. 

Astaka said 

3. O king, I am very curious to learn 
how men can lose their righteousness in the 
other world. Tell me also what regions are 
attained by what means. I know you are 
acquainted with all the doings and the say- 
ings. 

Yayati said:— 

4. O god-like man, they that speak of 
their own merits are doomed to the painful hell 
called Bhouma(earth). though 
really lean, they appear to grow (fat on 
earth) to become the food for vultures, dogs 
and jackals. 

5. therefore, O king, this censurable and 
wicked vice should be cast off. O king. 
I have now told you all. Tell me what 
more I shall speak. 

Astaka said:— 

6. When life is destroyed by age, vul¬ 
tures, Sit ik ant a, insects and worms eat up 
the human body,—where does man then 
live ? How does he come to life again ? 
I have never heard of any hell called 
Bhonma , 


Tayati said 

7. When the body is destroyed (by 
death), man, according to the effects of his 
acts, is born again in the womb of his mother 
He stays there in an indistirfet form, and he 
then gradually assumes distinct and visible 
form. He then reappears and walks #n 
the earth. thus he falls into the hell 
Bhouma (earth) and does not see the end 
of his existence. 

8. Some thus falling live for sity 
thousand years in the firmament; some 
again for eighty thousand years. They 
then fall (on this earth), and they are at¬ 
tacked by fearful Bhouma Rakshasas o\ 
sharp teeth. 

Astaka said:— 

9. Why are men, when thus falling from 
heaven, attacked by these fearful and 
sharp-teethed Rakshasas ? Why arc they 
not annihilated ? How do they again enter 
the womb ? 

Yayati said:— 

10—I r. All beings, thus fallen from heav¬ 
en, become subtle substance, living in water. 
This water subsequently becomes the semen 
from which life is created. It then enters 
the womb of a woman in her season and 
developes into the embryo. It then becomes 
visible life lkie the fruit from the flower. En¬ 
tering into trees, plants, vegitables, water, air 
earth and space, the watery seed of life 
becomes cjuadrudeds or' bipeds. This is 
the case with all creatures. 

Astaka said:— 

12—13. Does a being who has got a 
human form enter the womb in its own shape 
or in some other ? How does it acquire its 
distinct and visible shape, its eyes, ears and 
consciousness ? Tell me all this, I ask you, 
because 1 have my doubts ? 

Yayati said:— 

14. The being that remains in a subtle 
from in the seed, when dropped into the 
womb, is attracted by atmospheric lorce for 
purposes of rebirth, according to the merits 
of one’s acts. 

15—16. He then developes in course 
of time into the embryo. He is then fur¬ 
nished with the visible organisation. 
Coming out of the womb in course of time,, 
he becomes conscious of his existence. He 
then becomes sensible of sound by his ears, 
of colour and form by his eyes, of scent by 
his nose, of taste by his tongue, of touch by 
his whole body, and of ideas by his mind. t> 
Astaka, it is thus that the gross and visible 
body developes from the subtle essence. 



I£2 


MAHABHARATA. 


Astaka said 

17. The body is burnt, buried or other¬ 
wise destroyed after death. Reduced to no¬ 
thing on one’s death, by what principle is one 
again revived ? 

Tayati said 

18. O best of kings, the man who dies, 
assumes a subtle form, but he retains the 
consciousness of all his acts as if in a dream. 
He then assumes some other form with a 
quicker speed than that of air. 

19. The virtuous attain to a superior and 
the vicious to an inferior form of existence. 
The vicious becomes worms and insects. O 
illustrious one, I have nothing more to say. 

20. I have told you, how beings are born 
by the developement of their embryonic form 
as quadrupeds, bipeds, and six-footed crea¬ 
tures. What more will you ask me ? 

Astaka said 

21. O sire, how docs a man attain to 
those higher regions whence there is no re¬ 
turn to earthly life again ? is it by asceticism 
or knowledge ? How docs a man attain to the 
region of the highest bliss ? As I ask you, 
tell me all. 

Tayati said 

22. The wise say that there are seven 
gates through which admission might be 
gained to heaven. These are asceticism, 
gift, tranquility of mind, self-command, 
modesty, simplicity and kindness. A person 
loses all this in consequence of vanity. 

23. The man who having acquired know¬ 
ledge, regards himself as learned and des¬ 
troys the reputation of others by his learning, 
never goes to the region of the highest bliss. 
It does not also give him the power of attain- 
i tig to Brahma. 

24. Study, taciturnity, worship before 
fire, and sacrifices, these are the four means 
through which fear is removed. But when 
these four are mixed with vanity, they cause 
fear instead of removing it. 

25. The wise should never feel pride in 
receiving honours, nor should they be sorry 
if insulted. For it is the wise alone that 
honour the wise; the wicked and vicious 
can never act like the virtuous. tf l have 
given so much, I have performed so many 
sacrifices, I have studied so much, 1 have 
observed so many vows, 1 ’—such vanity and 
pride are the roots of alt fear. therefore, it 
must be abandoned by all means. 

26. Those learned men who accept as 
their only support the unchangeable and in¬ 
conceivable Brahma,—Brahma that show¬ 
ers blessings oh persons virtuous as you are. 


—enjoy perfect peace here in this world and 
hereafter in heaven. 

thus ends the ninetieth Section , the 
history of Vayati, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi rarva . 


Section 91

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Astaka said 

1. Those that are learned in the Vedas 
differ in opinions as regards the respective 
methods which should be practised by the 
Grihastas, Brahmacharis , Bhikhus and 
Vanaprasthas , so that they may acquire 
religious merits, 

Tayati said 

2. A Brahmachari must do the fol¬ 
lowing. When he will live in the house of his 
preceptor, he must receive lessons only when 
nis preceptor will call him to do it. He 
must serve his preceptor without waiting for 
his command. He must rise before his 
preceptor from his bed and go to bed after 
him. He must be humble, self-controlled, 
patient, vigilent, and devoted to study. 

3. It is said in the oldest Upanishada that 
he must perform sacrifices after acquiring 
wealth by honest means. He should 
spend it in charity; he should be hospitable 
to all that would come to his house ; he 
should never use anything without giving a 
portion to others. 

4. A Muni ( Brahmachari ) should live in 
the forest, depending on his own vigour and 
without searching for food. He should 
abstain from all vicious acts ; he should give 
away in charity; he should never inflict pain 
upon any creatures. It is then only that he 
can gain success. 

5. He is a true Bhikshu , who does not 
support himself by any manual labour, who 
possesses many accomplishments, who has 
his passions under complete control, who is 
thoroughly unconnected with all worldly 
concerns, who does not sleep under the 
shelter of a householder’s roof, who is with¬ 
out wife, and who travels over many coun¬ 
tries, going some distance every day. 

6—7. A learned man should adopt the 
Vanaprastha mode of life, after the perfor¬ 
mance of the necessary rites. He should 
adopt it when he has been able to control his 
thirst for enjoyments and desire of acquiring 
wealth. When a man dies in the forest, 
leading the Vatmprastha mode of life, he 
mixes his ancestors and grand-children, 
numbering ten generations including him¬ 
self; with the.divine essence 


ADI PARVA. 


33 


Askata said 

8 . How many kinds of Munis are there, 
and how many kinds of Mounts (observers 
of vows) ? V?e desire to hear all this. 

Yayati said 

9. O King, he is a true Muni , who pos¬ 
sesses all things pertaining to a village 
though living in the forest, and also pos¬ 
sesses all things pertaining to the forest 
though living in a village. 

Aakata said:— 

10. How is it possible to possess all 
things pertaining to a village when living in 
the forest, and all things pertaining to a 
forest when living in a village 7 

Yayati said 

11. A Muni lives in the forest after with¬ 
drawing himself from all worldly objects. 
But though he never seeks to possess things 
pertaining to a village, he may yet get them 
by his ascetic powers. 

12—13. A true Muni, withdrawn from 
all earthly objects, might live in a village, 
leading the life of a hermit. Clad in 
Kaupina (scantiest of robes,) he considers 
himself attired in the richest robe. He is 
content with food just sufficient to support 
life. 

14. He who abandons all desires, who 
has all his passions under complete control, 
and who has given up all actions, is the man 
who attains success. 

15. Why should you not revere the 
man who lives on pure food, who refrains 
from injuring others, whose heart is ever 
holy, who is effulgent in his ascetic merits, 
who is free from the leaden weight of desire 
and who abstains from injury even when it 
Is sanctioned by the scriptures 7 

16. Emaciated by hard asceticism, and 
reduced in marrow, blood and flesh, such a 
Muni not only conquers this world, but the 
highest world. 

17. The Muni who sits in Yoga medita¬ 
tion, and who becomes indifferent to happi¬ 
ness and misery, honour, and insult, conquers 
this world, and conquering it, he conquers 
the highest world. 

18. The Muni who eats like the kine and 
other animals, without providing for it 
beforehand and without any relish, becomes 
identified with the whole universe. 

thus ends the ninety first Section , the 
history of Yayati , in the Sambhava of the 
Adi fiarva. 


Section 92

(SAMBHAVA PA R V A)— Com tinned. 

Astaka Baid 

1. O king, who does amongst the two,— 
namely the ascetic and the man of know¬ 
ledge,—first attain to the communion with 
Brahma, although both exerting like the sun 
and the moon ! 

Yayati said 

2. He who is a man of knowledge, and 
who is self centrolled, though living among 
the householders with various sorts of desires, 
attains to salvation first. 

3. Those that devote themselves to Yoga 
meditation take time to acquire that know¬ 
ledge, for by practice alon£ they divest 
themselves from the idea of duality. 

4--5. Then again, if a man devoted to 
Yoga does not find sufficient time to attain to 
success in one’s one life, he is henifited in his 
next life by the progress already made. But 
the man of knowledge ever sees the indis- 
tructible Unity, therefore he, though emerg¬ 
ed in worldly enjoyments, is never affected 
in the heart. 

Astaka said 

6. O king, you are young, you are hand¬ 
some, you are decorated with celestial gar¬ 
lands, your splendour is great. From what 
place have you come, and where do you go 7 
Whose messenger are you ? Are you going 
to earth 7 

Yayati said 

7. As I have lost my religious virtues, I 
am falling into the Bhouma (earth) hell. I 
shall go there after finishing my talk with 
you. The Lokapalas are commanding me 
even now to hasten thither, 

8. O king, I have obtained the following 
boon from Tndra. though I shall fall on 
earth, yet 1 shall fall among wise and vir¬ 
tuous men. 

Astaka said 

9. O king, I believe, you know every 
thing. I ask you,—is there any region for 
myself either in heaven or in the firma¬ 
ment 7 If there be any,—you shall not fall. 

Yayati said 

10. O best of kings, there are manyre'- 
regions for you to enjoy in heaven, as many 
as the kine and horses of earth, as the amt 
mals in the wilderness and the hills 

Astaka said:— 

it. Q king, 1 give to you all those re¬ 
gions in heaven or in the firmament that 



MAHABHARATA. 


34 

are for me to enjoy. therefore, though fall¬ 
ing you mu9t not fall. Take them soon, 
wherever they may be, in heaven or in the 
firmament. Let your sorrow cease. 

Yayati said -— 

12. O best of kings, a Brahma-knowing 
Brahmana alone can accept gifts, and not 
men like ourselves. O king,  myself have 
given away (many gifts) to Brahmanas, as I 
should do. 

13. Let no man, who is not a Brahmana, 
and' no woman who is the wife of a hero, 
earn infamy by accepting gifts, I have 
always desired to perform virtuous acts on 
earth. What I have never done before, 
how shall I do it now and accept a gift T 

Pratardhana said:— 

14. O handsome one, I am Pratardhana 
by name. I ask you,i—is there any region 
for me in heaven or in the firmament to 
enjoy as fruits of my Virtues ? You know 
everything. 

Yayati said:— 

15. O king, innumerable regions, as 
effulgent as the solar disc, and fnlljrf great 
felicity, .await you. If you live pnly for 
seven days in each, they will never be ex¬ 
hausted. 

Pratardhana said:— 

r6. I give to you all of them. therefore, 
though falling, you must not fall. Let all the 
regions for me to enjoy be yours, whether 
they may be in heaven or in the firmament. 
Take themsoon, and let your sorrow cease. 

Vayati said:— 

17—18. O king, no king of equal energy 
should evferdesire to accept in gift the reli¬ 
gious merits of another king acquired by 
Yoga No king, if wise, should act in a 
censurable way, though afflicted with cala¬ 
mity. A king should keep his eyes. fixed 
on virtue and walk in the path of piety, 
and thus encrease his fame. A virtu¬ 
ous man like me, who know; What are his 
duties, should not act so meanly as you ask 
me to do. 

I9w When others, deserious of acquiring 
religious merit, do-not accept gifts) how can 
I do it what they do not ? 

Vaishampayana said:— 

When the best of kings, Yayati, said this, 
he was thus addressed by Vasumana. 

thus ends the ninety second Section , 
the history of Yayati , in the Sfiynkhuva cf 
the Adi Parva . 


Section 93

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vasumana said:— 

1. Iam Vasumana, the son of Oshada- 
swa. I ask you, O king,—is there any region 
for me to enjoy either in heaven or in the 
firmament, as fruits of my virtuous acts 7 
O high-souled one, you know all holy 
regions. 

Yayati said:— 

2. The extensive regions, as extensive as 
those in the firmament, on earth and ten 
points of heaven that are illuminated by the 
sun, are all.waiting for you. 

Vasumana said:— 

3. I give them all to you. Let those 
regions that are mine be all yours. O king, 
if it is improper for you to accept them in 
gift, then purchase them with a straw. 

Yayati said:— 

4. I do not remember to have ever 
bought or sold any thing m an unfair way. 
This has also never been done by other 
kings. How shall I do it then ? 

Vasumana said 

5. O king, if to purchase them be con¬ 
sidered by you improper, take them from 
me as gifts. I for myself speak, that I shall 
never go to those regions that are for me. 
Let them, therefore, be yours. 

Sivi said 

6. I am Sivi, the son of Ushinara. I 
ask you, f .O king, O sire,—is there any region 
in heaven or in the firmament for me to 
enjoy ? You know every region that one 
may enjoy as the fruit of his religious merit. 

Yayati said 

7. You have never disregarded eithce 
m mind or by speech the honest and the 
virtuous men that ever applied to you. Therr 
are infinite worlds for you to enjoy in heaven, 
all blazing like lightning. 

Sivi said:— 

8. If you consider their purchase as im¬ 
proper, I give them to you as gifts. O king, 
take them all. I shall never go to the region 
where the wise never fed the least grief. 

Yayati said:— 

9. O Sivi, you have indeed obtained for 
yourself infinite worlds, possessed as yoti 
are of the prowess of Indra. But I do not 
wish to enjoy regions given to me by others. 
therefore, I cannot accept your gifts. 



ADI PARVA. 


33 


Astaka said 

10. O king, each of us has expressed 
our desire to give you the regions that each 
of us has acquired by his religious merits. 
You refuse to accept them. We leave them 
for you, and we shall now descend into the 
earth-hell. 

Yayati said 

11. You are all truth-loving and wise. 
Give me that which I desire to have. I shall 
not be able to do what I have not done 
before. 

Astaka said 

12. To whom does these fine cars belong 
that we see before us ? Do men ride on 
them who go to the regions of everlasting 
bliss ? 

Yayati said 

13. These fine golden cars, as blazing as 
fire, and displaying great glory, will carry 
you to regions of bliss. 

Astaka said 

14. O king, get on these cars and go to 
heaven. We can wait. We shall follow 
you in time. 

Yayati said 

15. We can now all go together. All of 
us have conquered heaven. Behold, the 
glorious path to heaven becomes visible. 

Vaishampayana said 

16. Illuminating the whole firmament by 
the glory of their virtues, those excellent 
kings got on those cars and set out in order 
to get admittance into heaven. 

Astaka said 

17. I always thought that Indra was my 
special friend and that I shall, of all others, 
first obtain admittance into heaven. But 
how is it that Sivi, the son of Ushinara, 
has already left us behind ? 

Yayati said =— 

18—19. This son of Ushinara had given 
all he possessed to attain to the region of 
Brahma. therefore, he is the foremost 
among all of you. Sivi's liberality, asceticism, 
truth, virtue, modesty, good fortune, for¬ 
giveness, amiability, and desire of perform¬ 
ing good acts, have been so great that none 
can measure them. 

Vaishampay an a said 

2Q. Astaka, impelled by curiosity, again 
asked his maternal grandfather, who was 
fike Indra himself, ' O king, I ask you, 
tell me truly, whence have you come ? 
Who are you ? and whose son are you ? 


Yayati said!— 

21. I tell you truly. I am Yayati, the 
son ofNahushaand the father of Puru. I 
was a Sarvavounta ori earth. You are my 
kinsmen. 1 am your maternal grandfather. 

22. Having conquered the whole earth, 
I gave clothes to the Brahmanas. I gave 
them also one hundred horses fit for sacrifi¬ 
cial offerings. For such pious aots the celes¬ 
tials become propitious to those that per¬ 
form them. 

23. I gave also to Brahmanas this whole 
earth with her horses, elephants, kine, gold 
and all kinds of wealth. I gave away also 
one hundred Arbudas pi excellent, milch 
cows. 

24. The firmament and earth still exist 
owing to my truth and virtue. Fire still 
burns owing to my truth and virtue. Never 
a w’ord has been uttered by me which is not 
true. The wise, therefore, adore truth. 

25. O Astaka, all that I have told you, 
Pratardhana, and Vasumana, is the truth it¬ 
self. 1 know that all the worlds, all the 
Rishis and all the celestials are adorable only 
because Truth characterises them all. 

26. He who will duly read to the good 
Brahmanas the account of our ascension to 
heaven without malice shall himself attain 
to the same worlds w ith us. 

Vaishampayana said 

27. thus ascended to heaven that illus¬ 
trious man (Yayati) of great achievements. 
Rescued by his kinsmen, he left the earth and 
filled the three worlds with the fame of his 
deeds. 

thus ends the ninety third Section , the 
history of Yayati, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva 

Section 94

(SAMBHABA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Janamqjaya said 

1. Adorable Sir, I desire to hear the 
history of those kings who w ere descended 
from Puru. Tell me wliat powers ajid what 
achievements each possessed. 

2. I have heard that In the dynasty ot 
Puru there was not a single king who was 
deficient in good behaviour or in prowess. 
There was none who has no sons. 

3. O great ascetic, I desire to hear in 
detail the account of these kings who were 
endued with great learning and who posses¬ 
sed all accomplishments. 

V aishampay ana said 

4. As yop ask me I shall tell you all 
about the heroic, kings of Puru’s royal 



MAHA&HARATa. 


136 


dynasty, who were all equal to Indra in 
power. They possessed great affluence and 
commanded the respect of all, on account 
of their many accomplishments. 

5. Puru begot on his wife Paushti 
three great car«• warriors, namely Pravica, 
Iswara and Raudraswa. Amongst these 
three, Pravira kept up the line. 

6. PravirA begot on his wife Suraseni, 
a son named Manashyu. This lotus-eyed 
king had his sovereignty over the whole 
earth bounded by the Four seas. 

7. Manashyu begot on his wife Sauviri 
threesons, namely Sakta, Sanghanana and 
Vagmi; they were all great heroes and car- 
warriors. 

8. The wise and virtuous Raudrashwa 
begot on Apsara Misrakeshi ten sons who 
were all great bow-men. 

9. They were great heroes, and performed 
many sacrifices in honour of the celestials , 
they were learned in all the Sastras, and 
were virtuous. All of them begot sons. 

fo—11, They were Richcyu, Kaksheyu, 
powerful Krikaneyu, Sthandileyu, Vaneyu, 
greatly famous Jaleyu, intelligent .and 
strong Tejeyu, Indra-I»ke powerful Satyeyu, 
Oharmeyu and celestial-like powerful 
Sannateyu. 

12. Amongst them all, Richeyu became 
the sole lord of the whole earth and was 
known by the name of Anadhirsti. He 
was in prowess like Indra. 

13. Anadhristi had a son, named Mati- 
nara who became a very virtuous king and 
greatly famous. He performed both Raj - 
sJiuya and AshwamedJia sacrifices. 

14. Matinara had four greatly power¬ 
ful sons, namely Tansu, Mahana, Atiratha, 
and immeasurably glorious Drahyu. 

 5  An>b$gst thtas, greatly powerful 
Tansu became tjie perpetuator of Puru’s. 
lirre. He subjugated the whole eartn and 
gained great fame and splendour, 1 

16. Tansu begot a greatly powerful son, 
named Ilifta. .He became the foremost of 
all conquerors and subjugated the whole 
world. 

17. Ilina begot on his wife, Rothantari, 
five svns, Dushyanta being the eldest. 
They were all as great in power as the five 
elements. 

18. (They were) Dushyanta, Sura, 
Bhima, Pravashu and Vasu. O Janameja- 
ya, amongst them the eldest Dushyanta 
became king. 

19. Dushyanta begot on his wife, Sakun- 
taki, a learned son, named Bharata who 
became king. From him was the Bharata 


dynasty and from him spread its great 
fame. 

20. Bharata begot on his three wives 
nine sons, but none of them was like bis 
father, and Bharata was not satisfied with 
any of them. 

21. Thereupon their mothers, becoming 
angry, killed them all. therefore, the pro¬ 
creation of that great king was in vain. 

22. The king then performed a great 
sacrifice and obtained a son, named 
Bhumanyu through the grace of Bhara- 
dwaja. 

23. O best of the Bharata race, the des¬ 
cendant of Puru, regarding himself as really 
possessing a son, installed him as his heir- 
apparent. 

24—25. Bhumanyu begot on his wife 
Pushkarini six sons, namely Suhatra, Suhota 
Suhavi, Sayayu, Richika and Diviratha. 
The eldest of them Suhotra obtained the 
throne of the world. 

26. He performed many Rajshuya and 
Horse-sacrifices. He subjugated the whole 
earth bounded by the four seas, 

27—28. And full of elephants, kine, hor¬ 
ses and great wealth of gems and gold. 
The earth was, as it were, sinking with the 
weight of numberless human beings, eleph¬ 
ants, horses ancl cars. Suhotra virtuously 
ruled over all his subjects. 

29. During his reign, the surface of the 
whole earth was dotted all over with hun¬ 
dreds and thousands of sacrifical stakes. 
The earth became full of corns and human 
beings, 

30. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
the lord of the earth Suhotra begot on his 
wife, Aikshaki three sons, namely Ajamida 
Sumida and Puramida. 

31. The eldest of them Ajamida became 
the perpetuator of the royal line. O des¬ 
cendant of the Bharata race, he begot six 
sons upon his three wives. 

32. Riksha was born in the woipb of 
Dhumini, Dushyanta and Parameshti in 
that of Nili, and Jahnyu, Jala and Rupina 
in that of Keshini. 

33. All the Panchalas were descended 
from Dushyanta and Parameshti. The 
Kushikas were the descendants of the great¬ 
ly effulgent Jahnyu. 

34. Riksha was elder than Jala and 
Rupina ; he begot Samvarana, who was the 
perpetuator of the line. 

35—36 O king, it has been heard by us 
that when Samvarana, the son of Riksha, 
was ruling the earth, there occured a great 
loss of people on account of famine, plague, 
draught and disease. 



ADI PARVA. 


137 


37—38. The Bharata princes were de¬ 
feated by the armies 0/ their enemies; 
and the Panchalas, set out with their four 
kinds of troops to conquer the earth. They 
soon brought the whole earth under their 
sway, and with their ten Akshaahinis of 
soldiers the king of the Panchalas defeated 
the princes of Bharata. 

39. Samvarana then fled in fear with his 
wife and ministers, sons and relatives. 

40. He took shelter in the forest on the 
banks of the river Sindhu which extended 
up to the foot of the mountain. 

41. There lived the Bharatas within their 
fort for many years ; and thus full one thou¬ 
sand years passed away. 

42. (And when they were living there), 
the illustrious Rishi Vasishta one day came 
to those exiled Bharatas. On his approach, 
they went out and duly worshipped him. 

43. All the Bharatas offered him Arghya , 
and entertaining him with reverence, they 
told every thing to the great Rishi. 

44. When he was seated on his seat, 
thj king himself addressed him thus, 
4t O illustrious man, be our priest. We 
shall try to regain our kingdom." 

45—46. Vasishta replied to the Bharatas 
by saying On. We have heard that 
Vasishta installed the best of the Pauravas 
(Samvarana) as the lord over all the 
Kshatriya races. The king retouk the 
capital that was lost. 

47—48. He then began to make all the 
other kings of the world to pay tribute to 
him. That powerful monarch, thus getting 
possession of the whole earth, performed 
many sacrifices in which great presents were 
made to the Brahmanas. Samvarana 
begot on his wife Tapati, the daughter of 
Surya, a son named Kuru. 

49 As Kuru was greatly virtuous, he 
was installed as the king by all the people. 
It is after his name that Kuru Jaugala 
lias become so famous in the world. 

50—5 That great ascetic made Kuru - 
kshetra famous by his asceticism there. We 
have heard that Avikshit, Abhishyata, Cbait- 
raratha, Muni and famous Janamejaya were 
the five sons begot by him 011 his highly in¬ 
telligent wife Vahini. 

52. Avikshit begot Parikshit, powerful 
Savalaswa, Adiraja, Viraja, greatly strong 
Salmali, Uchaisrava, Bhangakara, and the 
eighth Jitari. 

53. In the race of these (eight heroes) 
were born, as the fruits of their many 
virtuous acts, seven greatly powerful car- 
warriors, Janameyaya being at the head, 

i8 


54 — 55  Parikshit had sons who were 
all learned in Dharma and Art ho . They 
were Kakshasena, Ugrasenx, and greatly 
effulgent Chitrasena, Indrasena, Susena, 
and Bhimasena. All the sons of Jana¬ 
mejaya were famous in the world as being 
greatly powerful (princes.) 

56—57 They were Dhritarashtra, the 
eldest, Pandu, Valhika, greatly effulgent 
Nishada, the mighty Jamvunaaa, Kunda- 
dara, Padati, and the eighth Vasati. They 
were all lrarncd in Dharma and Artha and 
engaged in doing good to all creatures. 

58 — 59  Amongst them Dhritarashtra 
became king, and he had eight sons, namely 
Kundika, Hasti, Vitarka, Kratha, Kundina, 
Havisrava, Indrabha, and the invincible 
Bhumanyu, Amongst the sons of Dhrita¬ 
rastra only three were famous. 

60. O descendant of Bharata, (they 
were) Pratipa, Dharmanetra and Sunetra. 
Amongst the three Pratipa became unrivalled 
of all. 

61. O best of the Bharata race, Pratipa 
begot three sons, namely Devapi, San tan u, 
and mighty car-warrior Valhika. 

62. Devapi adopted asceticism, impelled 
by the desire to do good to his brothers. 
Consequently the kingdom was obtained by 
Shantanu and the mighty car-warrior 
Valhika. 

63. O king, besides these (I have men¬ 
tioned), there were born in the Bharata race 
many other good monarchs all greatly 
effulgent and all like the celestial Rishis in 
virtue and ascetic power. 

64. In this way were born in the race of 
Manu, many mighty car-warriors like the 
celestials themselves, and who by their 
number greatly increased the Aila dynasty. 

thus ends the ninety fourth Section , the 
narration of the Puru dynasty % in the 
Sam bilava of the Adi Parva • 


Section 95
(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued, 
Janamejaya said 

1. O Brahmana, I have heard from-you 
the great history of my ancestors. I have 
also heard from you about the great kings 
that were born in my dynasty. 

2. But I am not still satiated with this 
charming account,—for it is so short. 
therefore, narrate to me in detail 

3. This delightful history, commencing 
from Prajapati Manu. Who will not feel 
delight in hearing such an account, sacred 
iu it is. 



MAHABHARATA. 


13 $ 


4. The fame of these monarchs covered 
the three worlds on account of their wisdom, 
virtue, accomplishments and high cha¬ 
racters. 

5. Having heard of their liberality, 
prowess, physical strength, mental vigour, 
energy and perseverence,—this history, sweet 
as ambrosia,—l have not been satiated. 


Vaishampayaaa said 

6. O king, hear the auspicious history, 
of your own race as 1 recite it to you in 
detail, and just as I heard it before from 
Dwaipayana. 

7. Daksha begot Aditi. Aditi begot 
Vivaswata. Vivaswata begot Manu. Manu 
begot Ua. 11 a begot Pururava, Pururava 
begot Ayusha, Ayusha begot Nahusha, 
Nahusha begot Yayati. Yayati had two 
wives, 

8. Namely Devajani, the daughter of 
Ushanas (Sukra) and Sarmishta, the 
daughter of Vrisaparva. This is a si oka 
about this line. 


o. Devayani gave birth to Yadu and 
Turvasu ; and Sarmishta, the daughter of 
Vrishaparva, gave birth to Drahyu, Anu 
and Puru. From Yadu, the Yadavas were 
descended, and from Puru the Pauravas, 


10. Puru had a wife, named Kaushalya, 
and he begot on her a son named janame- 
iava. He performed three great Horse-sa¬ 
crifices and a sacrifice called Vishwajita. 
He then retired into a forest. 


II. lanamejaya married Ananta, the 
daughter of Madhava. He begot on 
her a son, named Prachinata. He was so 
called because he conquered all the coun¬ 
tries in the east even where the sun 
rises. 


12. Prachinata married Asamaki, the 
daughter of the Yadavas, and she gave birth 
to a son, named Sanjati. 

13. San jati married Varangi, the daugh¬ 
ter of Drishatwata and she gave birth to a 
son called Ahanjati. 


14. Ahafliati married fJhanumati, the 
daughter of Kirtavija and he begot on her a 
son, named Sarvavauma. 

15, Sarvavauma married Sunanda, the dau¬ 
ghter of Kakeya who was taken by force, 
and she gave birth to a son, named Jayat- 
sena. 

16. Jayatsena married Susrava, the 
daughter bf the Vidbarva king, and she 
gave birth to a son, named Avachina. 


Avachina married another princess 
m of the Vidharva kings, called Maryada, and 
she gave birth to a son, named Arihana, 


18. Arihana married Agni, and she gave 
birth to a son, named Mahavauma. 

19. Mahavauma married Suyaja, the 
daughter of Prasenjit, and she gave birth 
to a son, named Ayutanayi. He was so 
called, because he performed a sacrifice in 
which the fat of one Ajruta male beings was 
required. 

20. Ajutanayi married Kama, the daugh¬ 
ter of Prithusrava, and she gave birth to 
a son, called Akrodhona. 

21. Akrodhona married Karamva, the 
daughter of the king of Kalinga, and she 
gave birth to a son, called Devatithi. 

22. Devatithi married Maryada, the 
princess of Videha, and she gave birth to 
a son, named Arihana. 

23. Arihana married Sudeva, the prin¬ 
cess of Anga and she gave birth to a son, 
Riksha. 

24. Riksha married Jwala, the daughter 
of Takshaka, and she gave birth to a son, 
named Matinara. 

25. Matinara performed the most effica¬ 
cious twelve years’ sacrifice on the banks 
of the Sarasmati . At the conclusion of the 
sacrifice, the Sararuoatt herself appeared 
before him and chose him as her husband. 
He begot on her a son, named Tangsu. 

26. Here is a sloka describing Tangsu’s 
descendants. Tangsu begot on his wife, 
the princess of Kalinga, a son, named 
Hina. 

27. liana begot on his wife, Rathantari, 
five sons, Dushyanta being the eldest of 
them. 

28. Dushyanta married Shakuntala, the 
daughter of Vishwamitra, and she gave 
birth to a son, named Bharata. 

29. Here are two slokas, describing the 
descendants of Bharata. ' O Dushyanta, 
the mother is but a sheath of flesh (within 
which the son dwells). The son sprung from 
the father is the father himself. therefore, 
cherish your son. Do not insult Shakuntala. 

30. O best of men, the son, begotten by 
one’s own self, rescues him from the abode of 
Yama. You are the father of this son. 
Shakuntala has spoken the truth.’ 1 

31. It is for this reason he was called 
Bharata. Bharata married Sunanda, the 
daughter of Sarvasena, the king of Kashi, 
and she gave birth to a son, called Bhum- 
anyu. 

32. Bhumanyu married Vijaya, the 
daughter of Dasarha, and she gave birth to 
a son, named Suhotra. 

33. Suhotra married Suvama, the 
daughter of Ikshaku, and she gave birth to 



ADI PARVA. 


139 


A sArt, named Hasti, who founded this city, 
Called, after his name Hastinapur 

34. Hast! married Yosodhara, the 
princess of Trigartha, and she gave birth to 
. son, named Vikunthana. 

35. Vikunthana married Sudeva, the 
princess of Dasarha, and she gave birth to a 
son, named Ajamida. 

36. Ajamida had four wives, namely 
Kaikeyi, Gandhari, Visala and Riksha, and 
he begot on them two thousands and one 
hundred sons And Amongst them all, 
Samvarana became the perpetuator of the 
dynasty. 

37 Samvarana married Tapati, the 
daughter of Vivaswata, and she gave birth 
to a son, named Kuru. 

38% Kuru married Subhangi, the princess 
of Dasarha, and she gave birth to a son, 
named Viduratha. 

39. Viduratha married Sungpr3a, the 
daughter of Madhava, and she gave birth 
to a son, named Anaswa. 

40. Anaswa mairied Amrita, the 
daughter of the Mahavas, and she gave 
birth to a son, named Parikshit. 

41. Parikshit married Sujasa, the daugh¬ 
ter of Vahuda, and she gave birth to a son, 
named Bhimasena. 

42. Bhimasena married Kumari, the 
princess of Kekaya, and she gave birth to 
a son, named Pratisrava. 

43. Pratisrava begot Pratipa; Pratipa 
married Sunanda, the daughter of Sivi, and 
she gave birth to three sons, namely Devapi, 
San tan u and Valhika. 

44. Devapi retired into a forest as a 
hermit when he was still a boy. therefore, 
Shantanu became king. 

45. Here occurs a sloka, describing San¬ 
tanu.  Those that were touched by this 
king with his hands, felt indescribable 
pleasure. They became restored to youth. 
therefore, this king was called Shantanu.'' 

46. Shantanu married Ganga, and she 
gave birth to a son, named Devavrata, who 
was afterwards called Bhishma. 

47. Bishma, being desirous of doing 
good to his father, got him married to Satya- 
vati, who was also called Gbnndakali. 

48. In her maidenhood she gave birth 
to a son by Parasara, named Dwaipayana. 
Shantanu begot two more sons on her, 

49. Namely Vichitravirya and Chitran- 
gada. But before they attained to their 
youth, Chitrangada was killed by the Gan- 
dharvas. therefore, Vichitravirya became 
king. 

50. Vichitravirya married the two daugh¬ 
ters of the king of Kashi born of Kaushalya, 
named Ambika and Ambalika. 

51. Vichitravirya died childless. There¬ 
upon, Satyavati began to think how the 
dynasty of Dushyanta might be perpe¬ 
tuated. 

52. She then thought of Rishi Dwai¬ 
payana in her mind. He stood before her 
and said, 14 What are your commands ?” 

53  She told him, “ Your brother Vichi¬ 
travirya has gone to heaven childless Beget 
virtuous children for him.” 

54. Dwaipayana consented to do it, and 
he begot three sons, namely Dhritarashtra, 
Pandu and Vidura. 

55. The king Dhritarashtra begot one 
hundred sons on his wife Gandhari on ac¬ 
count of the boon granted by Dwaipayana. 

56. Amongst those one hundred sons, four, 
became famous; (they were) Duryodhaqa, 
Dushasana, Vikarna, and Chitrasena. 

57. Pandu had two best jewels of wives, 
namely Kunti, also called Pritha, and 
Madri. 

58. Pandu one day went to hunt and saw 
a deer with its mate. It was a Rishi in the 
form of a deer. He killed it with his arrow 
in that state, when his desire w as not 
satiated. 

59. Wounded with the arrow of the king, 
the deer quickly changed its form and be-, 
came a Rishi. He said to Pandu, “You 
are virtuous, and you know the pleasure 
derived from the gratification of one’s desire. 
My desire is not yet satisfied, but 
you have killed me. therefore, you will also 
die when you will be so engaged and when 
your desire will not be gratified.” Pandu 
became pale to hear this curse. And from 
that time he did not go to his wives. 

60. He told them, ” I have been cursed 
by my fault. But I have heard that there 
are no regions hereafter for those who are 
childless.” therefore, he asked Kunti to 
raise offspring for him. Kunti said, 14 Let it 
be so.” By Dharma she had Yudhishthira by 
Maruta Bhrma and by Indra Arjuna, 

61. Pandu was much pleased with her. 
and said, 44 This your sister (my co-wife) is 
also childless. therefore, cause her to crive 
birth to children.” 

62. Kunti said, Let it be so and she 
imparted unto Madri the Mantra of invoca¬ 
tion. And Madri gave birth by the Ashwinis, 
the twins Nakula and Sahadeva, 

63. One day Pandu saw Madri decked 
in ornaments, and his desire was kindled 
As soon as he touched her, he died. 


MAHABHARATA. 


40 


64. Thereupon, Madri ascended his 
funeral pyre. She said to Kunti, “ Let 
thy twin sons be affectionately brought up 
by you." 

65. Some time after, the Pandu princes, 
with their mother Kunti, were taken by the 
ascetics to Hastinapur, and they were intro¬ 
duced to Bhishma and Vidura. 

66 . After introducing them to all the 
orders, the ascetics disappeared in the very 
sight of all. 

66. After the conclusion of the speech of 
these ascetics, flowers were showered down 
upon the place, and celestial dRurus were 
beaten in the sky. 

67. The Pandavas were, thereupon, ac¬ 
cepted (by all). They then represented 
the death of their father, and duly perform¬ 
ed his obsequies. As they were brought 
up there in their boyhood, Duryodhana be¬ 
came very jealous of them. 

68. The sinful (Duryodhana), acting like 
a Rakshasa, attempted by various means to 
drive them away, out what is to be can 
never be prevented. 

69. Dhritarashtra then by an act of de¬ 
ception sent them to Varanavata. They 
also went gladly there. 

70. An attempt was there made to burn 
them to death, but they were saved through 
the warning counsel of Vidura. 

7!. After this Hirimba was killed, and 
they then went to a place, called Ekacha- 
kra. 

72. They killed at Ekachakra a Rakshasa, 
named Vaka. They then went to Pan- 
chala city. 

73. There they obtained Draupadi as 
their wife, and they returned to their own 
kingdom. 

74. They lived in peace there (in Hasti- 
napura) and begot sons. Yudhishthira begot 
Prativendya, Bhima (begot) Sutasoma, 
Arjuna (begot) Sutakiriti, Nakula (begot) 
Satanika, and Sahadeva (begot) Srutakar- 
mana. 

75. Yudhishthira obtained in Syamvara for 
his wile Devika, the daughter of Govashana 
of the Saivya race, ana he begot < 5 n her a 
son, named Yaudheya. 

76. Bhima also obtained for his wife 
Valandhara, the daughter of the king of 
Kashi, by offering as his dower his own great 
prowess. He begot on her a son, named 
oarvaga, 

77. Arjuna went to Dwarika, and there 
he married by force the sweet-speeched 
Suvadra, the sister of Vasudeva (Krishna). 
He begot on her a son, named Abhimanyu, 


who was endued with all accomplishmartf 
and who was dear to Vasudeva him 
self. 

78. Nakula obtained for his wife Kare- 
numati, the princess of Chedi, and he begot 
on her a son, named Niramitra. 

79. Sahadeva obtained in Syamvara 
Vijaya, the daughter of Dyutimata, the 
king of Madra. He begot a son on her, 
named Suhotra. 

80. Bhima begot sometime before on 
Hirimba a son, named Ghatatkacha. 

81. These were the eleven sons, begot by 
the Pandavas. Amongst them Abhimanyu 
was the perpetuator of the dynasty. 

82. He married Uttara, the daughter 
of the king of Birata. She gave birth to a 
dead child, whom Pritha (Kunti) took up 
on her lap at the command of Krishna 
who said, “I will revive this child of six 
months.” 

83. though born before time, having 
been burnt by the fire of the weapon (hurled 
by Ashwathama), though deprived of life 
strength and energy, he was revived by 
Vasudeva and was given strength, energy 
and prowess. After thus making him 
alive, Vasudeva said, M As this child is born 
in an extinct race, let him be called Pari- 
kshit.” 

84. Parikshit married Madravati, your 
mother, and she gave birth to you, Jana- 
mejaya. 

85. You have begotten two sons on your 
wife Vapustama, named Satanika and San- 
kakama. And Satanika has also begotten 
a son on the princess of Vidcha, named Ash- 
wamedbadatta. 

86. thus have I narrated to you the his¬ 
tory of the Kuru and Partdu dynasty. It is 
excellent, virtue-increasing and greatly sa¬ 
cred. It should always be heard by the 
vow-observing Brahmanas, and Kshatriyas 
devoted to the duties of their order and 
expert in protecting their subjects. ’(It 
should be heard) also by Vaisyas with atten¬ 
tion, and with reverence by Sudras, whose 
chief duties are to wait upon the three other 
orders. 

87. Those Brahmanas, learned in the 
Vedas, and all those men who will re¬ 
cite or listen to this holy history with atten¬ 
tion and reverence, will conquer the heaven 
and attain to the abode of the blessed. 
They will be always respected and 
adored by the celestials, Brahmanas and all 
other men. 

88. This holy history, Bharat a , has been 
told by the illustrious Vyasa. The Brah¬ 
manas, learned in the Vedas, and all those 



ADI PARVA. 


tner\ who hear it recited with reverence 
and without malice, conquer the heavens 
and earn great virtues. though sinning, 
he is not disrespected by any. 

89. Here occures a sloka. “ This Bha- 
rata is equal to the Vedas. It is holy and 
good. It gives wealth, fame and life. 
therefore, it should be heard by men with 
great attention.” 

thus ends the ninety fifth Section , the 
history of Puru dynasty, in the Sambhava 
of the Adi Parva . 


Section 96

(SAMBHABA PARVA .)—Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. There was born a king in the race of 
Ikshaku, and he was known by the name of 
Mahavisha. He, a man, a lord of the world, 
was truthful and was truly powerful. 

2. By performing one thousand Ashwa- 
medha and one hundred Rajshuya sacrifices, 
he pleased the lord of the celestials. Then 
he ascended to heaven. 

3. Once upon a time, the celestials were 
one day worshipping Brahma. Many 
royal sages and king Mahavisha were also 
present there. 

4. The queen of the rivers, Ganga also 
came there to pay her adorations to the 
Grandsire. Her garments, as white as the 
moon, were blown away by the winds. 

5. As her person thus became exposed, 
the celestials bent down their heads, but 
the royal sage Mahavisha rudely continued 
to stare at her. 

6 . For this (rude act), Mahavisha was 
cursed by Brahma. He said, “You will be 
born on earth and, you shall then again 
attain to these regions.” 

7. The king (Mahavisha) then remem¬ 
bered all the monarchs and ascetics on earth 
and wished to be born as the son of the 
greatly powerful Pratipa. 

8. The best of the rivers, (Ganga) seeing 
the king Mahavisha lose his firmness, went 
away thinking him in her mind. 

9. She saw on her way those dwellers 
of heaven, the Vasus, who were dejected, 
and who had lost heaven. 

10. The best of rivers, seeing them in 
that state asked them, “O dwellers of hea¬ 
ven, why do you look dejected? Is every 
thing all right with you.

it. The celestial Vasus replied to her, 
great river, we have been cursed for 
our little fault by the illustrious Vasistha in 
anger. 

12. Vasistha was engaged in his Sandhya 
(twilight worship) ; that best of Rishis was 
not seen by us. We in our ignorance cross¬ 
ed him. therefore, he cursed us in anger, 
saying, ‘Be born as men. 

13. We are not able to frustrate what 
has been said by that Brahma-knowing 
Rishi. Kindly make us, the Vasus, your 
sons by becoming a woman on earth. 

14. O amiable one, we are unwilling to 
enter the womb of any human female.” 
Having been thus addressed she said 

Ganga said 

15. Who is that best of men who will be 
your father? 

The Vasus said:— 

16. There will be born on earth a son to 
Pratipa who will be a greatly famous king. 
He will be our father on earth. 

Ganga said:— • 

17. O celestials, this is also my wish which 
you sinless ones have expressed. I shall do 
the favourite works of that king. It is also 
your wish as just expressed. 

The Vasus said:— 

18. O lady of three courses (celestial, ter¬ 
restrial and subtaranean), you should throw 
your children into water just after their 
birth, so that we may not have to live for long 
on earth. 

Ganga said:— 

19. I shall do as you desire. But so 
that my companionship with him may not 
be entirely fruitles,—do this that one son 
may live. 

The Vasus said:— 

20. We shall each give one eighth part 
of our respective energies, and from it a son 
will be born to you who will live according 
to your and his wishes. 

21. But this son will not beget any chil¬ 
dren on ear h. therefore, your that power¬ 
ful son will be childless. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

22. The Vasus making this arrangement 
with Ganga, went away in delight to the 
place where they lived. 

thus ends the ninety sixth Section , the 
history of Mahavisha, in the Sambhava , of 
the Adi Parva , 

Section 97

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. There was a king, named Pratipa, 
engaged in doing good to all creatures. He 
spent many years in ascetic penances, going 
to the source of (the river) Ganga. 

2. The accomplished and beautiful 
Ganga, in the form of- a tempting woman, 
rose from the water and came to the king. 

3. That beautiful-featured lady, that 
intelligent celestial maiden, endued with 
ravishing beauty, sat upon the right thigh 
of the king which was like a Sal tree. 

4. Thereupon, the king Pratipa asked 
that famous one, “O fortunate ladv, what 
good can I do to you and which you desire ?” 

The Maiden said 

• 5. O king. I desire to hare you. I offer 
mvself,—accept me. To reject a woman 
who is full of desire is never considered 
good by the wise. 

Pratipa said 

6. O beautiful lady, I never go to an¬ 
other man’s wife out of hist. O fortunate 
maiden, this is my solemn vow. 

The Maiden said 

7. I am neither inauspicious, nor ugly, 
nor a detestable maiden. I am a celestial 
damsel of great beauty, O king, I offer 
myself,—accept me. 

Pratipa said 

8. I have abstained from the course te 
which you would incite me. If i break my 
vow, its sin will destroy me. 

9. O beautiful lady, you have sat upon 
my right thigh. O timid girl, it is the seat 
for daughters and daughters-in-law. 

10. The left thigh is the seat for the wife, 
but you have rejected it. therefore, O 
best lady, I cannot accept you. 

11. O beautiful girl, be my daughter-in- 
law. I accept you for my son. The left 
thigh is for the wife which you have not 
accepted. 

The Maiden said 

I. O virtuous man, let it be as you say. 
Let me be united with your son. Out of 
respect for you, I shall be a wife of the 
famous Bharata race. 

13. You are the refuge of all the mo- 
narchs of the earth. I am incapable of 
reciting yeur qualifications even in one hun¬ 
dred yeans. 


14. O virtuous man, the greatness and 
goodness of many celebrated monarchs of 
(your) this race is unlimited. But, O lord, 
tnis must be the term (of my becoming your 
daughter-in-law) that your son shall not be 
able to judge of the propriety for my acts. 

15. Living thus with your son, I shall 
make him happy and do hi m good. He 
shall finally ascend heaven in consequence 
of his virtues and good conduct and of the 
sons I shall bear him. 

Vaishampayana said 

16. O King, having said this, the celestial 
maiden then and there disappeared. The 
king also waited for the birth of his son, 
so that he could fulfil his promise. 

17. Some time after, the best of Kshatriyas, 
that light of the Kuru race, Pratipa, was en¬ 
gaged with his wife in ascetic penances writh 
the desire of a son. 

18. When they grew old, a son was 
born to them and this son was Mahavisha. 
He was called Shantanu, because he was born 
when his father had controlled his passions 
by ascetitism. 

19. The best of Kurus, Shantanu, know¬ 
ing that the regions of indestructible happi¬ 
ness could be gained only by virtuous deeds, 
devoted himself to virtue, 

20. When Shantanu grew up to be 
a youth, Pratipa told him, O Shantanu, 
some time before, a celestial damsel came to 
me for good. 

21. If you meet that beautiful celestial 
damsel in secret, and if she solicits you to 
beget offspring on her, accept her as your 
wife. 

22. O sinless one, judge not the propri¬ 
ety or impropriety of anything she does. 
Ask not who she is, whom she belongs to, and 
whence she comes. But accept her as your 
wife at my comrqand.” 

23. Having thus commanded his son 
Shantanu and installed him on his throne, 
that king, Pratipa, retired into a forest. 

24. That greatly intelligent king Shantanu, 
as effulgent as the king of the celestials, 
became a lover of hunting and passed 
much of his time in the woods, 

25 That best kings killed many deer 
and buffaloes. Wandering along the banks 
of the Ganges, he came upon a place fre¬ 
quented by Siddhyas and Charanas. 

26. There did the great king meet with 
one day a lovely damsel of blazing beauty 
like Sree herself. 

27. She was a faithless beauty and her 
teeth were like pearls. She was decked 
with celestial ornaments. She wore gar¬ 
ments as fine and beautiful as the filaments 
of lotus. 

28. The king was surprised to see that 
damsel of great beauty ; and his hair all 
over his body stood up in rapture. His 
steadfast gaze drank her charms, but it 
failed to satiate him. 

29. The maidan also, seeing that king of 
great effulgence move about in great agita¬ 
tion, was moved and felt for him an affec¬ 
tion and friendship. She gazed at him and 
longed to gaze at him more. 

30—31. The king then addressed her in 
sweet words, “O beautiful one, O beauty of 
slender waist, be you a lady of the Deva or 
Danava race, be you a maiden of the race 
of the Ghandharvas or the Apsaras, be you a 
damsel of the Yakshas or the Nagas,—or be 
you a human female, I solicit you to be my 
wife. 

thus ends ninety seventh Section , the 
history of Shantanu, in the Sambhava of the 
Adi Parva . 


Section 98

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Having heard these soft and sweet 
words of the smiling king, that faultless 
maiden remembered the promise she had 
made to the Vasus. 

2. She spoke to the king, sending a thrill 
of pleasure; (she said), “O protector of the 
world, I shall become your wife and obey 
your commands. 

3. But O king, you must not interfere in 
any of my acts, whether they be agreeable 
or disagreeable to you. You most not also 
speak to me in harsh words. 

4. O king, so long you will act in the 
way I ask you to do, I shall live with you. 
But I shall certainly leave you as soon as 
you interfere with me, or use harsh words 
towards me." 

5. The best of the Bharata race, the king 
said, Be it so.” Thereupon, the maiden 
was exceedingly glad to get that excellent 
king for her husband. 

6. King Shantanu also was exceedingly 
pleased to get her for his wife. He fully en¬ 
joyed her sweet company. Adhering to his 
promise, he refrained from asking her any¬ 
thing. 

7. The lord of the world, king Shantanu, 
became very much pleased with her beauty, 
conduct, magnanimity and attention to 
comforts. 

8. That celestial lady, Ganga of the throe 
courses, assuming a human form of exceed¬ 
ing beauty and excellent feature, 

9. Lived happily as the wife of Shantanu, 
having as the fruit of her virtues, obtained 
that best of kings, as effulgent as the king of 
the celestials. 

10. She pleased the king with her at¬ 
tractiveness and love, with her affection and 
wits, her music and dance, and king was ex¬ 
ceedingly pleased with her. 

11. The king was so much sunk in the 
beauty of his wife, that months, seasons and 
years rolled away without his being conscious 
of them 

12. When the king was thus enjoying 
himself with his wife, eight sons were born to 
him. They were all like the celestials. 

13. O descendant of the Bharata race, as 
soon as they were born, they were one after 
the other thrown into the river by Ganga, 
who said, when she threw them into the 
stream. "This is done for your good” 

14. The king Shantanu could not be 
pleased with such conduct, but he did not 
speak a word to her for the fear of losing 
her. 

15. When the eighth son was born, and 
when Ganga was smiling (before she threw 
it into the river), the king, desiring to protect 
his son, said in sorrow, 

16. “Do not kill it. Who are you? To 
whom do you belong ? Why do you kill your 
own sons ? Murderess of your sons, you are 
earning great sins by your improper acts.” 

Ganga said 

17. As you desire for a son, I shall not 
kill this child. You have become the fore¬ 
most of fathers. But there must be an end 
of my stay with you according to our agreement. 

18. I am Ganga, the daughter of Janhu, 
worshipped by all great Rishis. I have so 
long lived with you for accomplishing the 
purposes of the celestials. 

19. These sons were the eight celestials,
the illustrious and greatly effulgent 
Vasus. They had to assume human form 
in consequence of the curse of Vasishta. 

20. There is none on earth who desires to 
be their progenitor. There is none among 
human females like me who may be their 
mother. 

21. Therfore I assumed the human form, 
to become their mother. You have acquire 
great regions of .celestial bliss by becoming 
the progenitor of the eight Vasus. 

22. My agreement with the celestial 
Vasus was that I should free them from 
their human birth as soon as each would be 
born. 

23. Thus have I freed them from the 
curse of the illustrious Rishi Apava (Vasishta) 
Be blessed, I leave you now. Rear 
this child of rigid vows. 

24- I promised to the Vasus to live with 
you so long (as I have lived). Let this
child of me be known by the name of Gangadatta.

Section 99

(SAMBHAVA PARVA )-Continued. 

Shantanu said:— 

1. Who was Apava and what fault was 
committed by the Vasus that theyhad to be 
born among men in consequence of his curse?

2. What also had this child done that he 
should live among men?

3. Why also the lord of the three worlds,
the Vasus, were condemned to be born
among men? O daughter of Janhu, tell me all.

Vaishampayana said;— 

Having been thus addressed, the celestial lady, 
the daughter of Janhu, Ganga 
told Shantanu,  ‘O best of men,’ 

Ganga said 

5. O best of the Bharata race, the son 
that was formerly born of Varuna, was tbe 
Rishi named Vasishta. He was subsequently- 
known by the name of Apava.  

6. His hermitage stood by the side of 
the best of mountains, the Meru; The place 
was holy and abounded in deer and birds. 
It was covered with all the best flowers. 

7 O best of the Bhrata race, that fore- 
virtuous men, the son of Varuna, 
practised his penances in that forest, abounding
in sweet roots, fruits and water. 

8. Daksha had a daughter who was 
known as Suravi. O best of the Bharata race,
that lady gave birth to a cow by Kashyapa.

9. The virtuous-minded son of Varuna 
obtained that best of kine, capable of 
granting every desire, for the purpose of his homa
rites and for benifitting the world. 

10. That cow dwelt in that forest adored 
f all the Rishis. She roamed fearlessly 
in those sacred and delightful woods. 

11. O best of the Bharata race, once on a 
time came to that forest adored by the 
celestial Rishis, all the celestial Vasus, 
Prithu being at their head. 

12. They roamed with their wives into 
the forests and enjoyed themselves in those 
delightful woods and mountains. 

13. O Indra like powerful man, one of the 
slender-waisted of the Vasus saw that cow 
roaming in the forest. 

14-15. O king, her name was Nandini 
and she could grant every desire ; she pos¬ 
sessed the wealth of all accomplishments, and large 
eyes, full udders, fine tail,
handsome hoop and every auspicious signs. She gave 
much milk Seeing her such, the wife of the
Vasu showed her in astonishment to 
her husband named Dyau. 

16. O descendant of Puru, O king, this 
cow of many qualifications was formerly 
shown by the daughter of the Vasus to the 
Vasu.

17. O elephant-like powerful man, when 
that cow was shown to Dyan, O king he 
began to admire her quality and thus spoke 
to the lady (his wife). 

18. O black-eyed lady of beautiful thighs, 
this excellent cow belongs to the Rishi, the 
son of Varuna, to whom belongs this
excellent wood. 

19. O slender-waisted lady, he who 
drinks the milk of this cow lives young for 
ten-thousand years.” 

20. O best of kings, having heard this, 
that lady of slender-waist thus addressed 
her husband of burning effulgence. 

21. I have a friend among men on earth, 
named Jitavati, the daughter of a king, who 
possesses great beauty and youth. 

22. She is the daughter of the royal sage, 
truthful and intelligent Ushinara. Her
wealth of beauty is famous all over the world.

23. O illustrious one, for her, I desire
to possess this cow with her calf. O best
of celestials, bring her soon.

24. So that my that human friend
drinking her milk, becomes the only person 
on earth free from disease and decrepitude.

25. O illustrious god, O blameless god 
you should grant me my this desire. There 
is nothing which would be more agreeable, 
to me.

26. Having heard her these words, 
Dyau, in order to please that celestial 
lady, stole the cow with the help of Prithu 
and his other brothers. 

27. O king, commanded by his lotus- 
eyed wife, Dyau did her bidding, forgetting 
the great ascetic merits of the Rishi who 
owned her (the cow). He did not know then 
that he would have to fall for the sin of 
stealing the cow.

28. When in the evening the son of 
Varuna returned to his hermitage with the 
fruits he had collected, he did not find the 
cow and its calf. Then he began to search 
for her in that excellent wood. 

29. The noble-minded and greatly intelligent
ascetic searched for the cow everywhere
in the woods; but though he searched 
long, yet he could not find her. 

30. The man of ascetic vision then found 
that she had been stolen by the Vasus 
His anger was at once roused, and he cursed 
the Vasus, 

31. Sayin "As the Vasus have stolen 
my cow of sweet milk and handsome tail, 
they shall certainly be born as men
on earth.

32. O best of the Bharata race, the illustrious
Apava, the best of Rishis, thus cursed 
the Vasus out of anger. 

33. Having thus cursed them, the illustrious 
man again engaged himself in asceticism.
O king when the celestial Vasus 
were thus cursed in anger by that Brahmarshi 
and ascetic of great power, 

34. They soon came to the hermitage of the
illustrious man; as soon as they came 
to know of it,

35. O best of kings, the Vasus tried to 
pacify that Rishi, but they failed to obtain 
grace from that best of Rishis, 

36. Apava, learned in the rules of every 
virtue. O best of men,

37. The virtuous Rishi said, “You have 
been cursed by me along with Dyau and 
others. But you shall be freed from my curse 
within a year of your birth among men. 

33. But he for whose act you have all 
have been cursed by me, that Dyau, will have to 
remain on earth for long for his own (sinful) act.

39. I shall not make my words futile 
though uttered in anger. But Dyau shall not 
beget offspring when dwelling on earth. 

40. He will be virtuous-minded and learned
in Sastras. He will be very obedient to his
father and abstain from the pleasure
of women."

41. Thus addressing all the Vasus, the 
great Rishi went away. And the Vasus 
all came to me.

42. O king, they prayed to me for a boon
saying, "O Ganga, as soon as each of us is born, 
you ourself should throw us into water.

43. O best of kings, I did act accordingly,
in order to free them from the effect
of the curse.

44 - O descendant of the Bharata race,
O excellent king, the only one namely Dyau
himself is to live on Earth. 

Vaishampayana said 

45. Having said thus, the goddess
disappeared then and there. Taking 
her son with her, she went away to the 
place she wished to go.

46. That son of Shantanu was named 
both Gangeya and Devavrata, and he 
excelled his father in all accomplishments. 

47 - Shantanu then went to his own capital 
with a sorrowful heart. I shall now narrate the
many accomplishments of Shantanu,

48. And the great fortune of the illustrious king 
of the Bharata race, the history of 
whom is called this effulgent Mahabharata. 

Section 100

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)
Vaishampayana said 

1. The king Shantanu, adored of the 
al Th^N die royal sages, was famous in 
all the worlds as being virtuous-minded
and truthful.

2. Self-control, liberality, forgiveness, 
intelligence, modesty, patience and superior 
energy ever dwelt in that best of men.

3. That king was endued with such accomplishments.
He was learned in both 
Dharma and Artha. He Was both the
protector of the Bharata race and all the people.

4. His reck was like the conch shell, his 
shoulder was broad, he was as powerful as 
a mad elephant. All the auspicious signs ol 
royalty dwelt in his person, and they considered 
that to be their best abode.

5. The people, seeing the (virtuous) acts 
of that king of great achievements, came to 
know that virtue was ever superior to 
pleasure and profit. 

6. These accomplishments were aH m 
that best of men, Shantanu, and no other 
king was able to equal him in virtue. 

7. All the kings of the earth, seeing him 
devoted to all kinds of virtues, installed 
him as the king of kings. 

8. All the kings were free from misery, 
fear and anxiety of all kinds during the 
reign of that lora-protector of the Bharata 
race. They all slept in peace and rose in 
peace after happy dreams. 

9. AH the kings became virtuous and 
devoted to liberality, and religious acts and 
sacrifices from the great example set by that 
great king of wonderful achievements 
(Shantanu) who was like Indra himself. 

10. When the earth was ruled by 
Shantanu and other kings like him, the 
religious merits of every order greatly 
increased. 

11. The Brahmanas were served by the 
Kshatriyas ; the Kshatriyas were served by 
the Vaisyas ; the Sudras, adoring both the 
Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas, served the 
Vaisyas. 

12. Shantanu lived in Hastinapur, the 
beautiful capital of the Kurus ; he ruled 
over the whole earth bounded by the sea. 

13. He was truthful and virtuous like the 
king of the celestials ; and from his liber¬ 
ality, virtues, and asceticism he acquired 
great fortune. 

14. He was free from anger and malice, 
he was as handsome as Soma himself. He 
was as effulgent as the sun and as cour¬ 
ageous as the Vayu. He was like Yama 
in anger and like Earth in patience. 

15. O king, when Shantanu ruled the 
earth, no deer, beers, birds or other animals 
were needlessly killed. 

16. The virtue of kindness reigned in the 
kingdom of Shantanu, who himself was full of 
mercy and free from anger. He equally 
protected all creatures. 

17. The sacrifices in honor of the cels- 
tials, Rishis and Pitris were performed 
but no creature was sinfully depnved of its 
life. 

18 . That king became a father of 
those that were miserable, of those that 
had no protectors,—nay even of birds and 
beasts and all creatures. 

19. During tho reign of that best of the 
Kura kings, the king of all kings, (Shantanu) 
the speech was mixed with truth, and mind 
was de/oted to liberality and virtue. 

20. Having enjoyed the companionship 
of women for thirty six years, he retired 
into a forest. 

21. Shantanu's son, the Vasu, born of 
Ganga, named Devavrata, resembled his 
father in beauty, in conduct, in habits and in 
learning. 

22. He was expert in all sorts of weapons
belonging to heaven and earth, lie was 
greatly strong and vastly energetic; he was 
a great car-warrior; and he was a great 
beauty. 

23. Once on a time, he (Shantanu) wounded 
a beer and pursued it along the banks of 
the Ganges. 1 he king Shantanu saw that the 
Vagirathi (Ganga) had became shallow. 

24. Having seen this, the best of men, 
Shantanu began to reflect, “Why does not 
the best of rivers run as before ?’ 

25. In searching for its cause, the illustrious 
king saw a beautiful, strong built and 
amiable youth, 

26. Like Indra himself, who had checked
the flow of the river Ganga by his sharp 
celestial weapons.

27. The king, seeing this wonderful feat 
(of the youth), namely the checking of 
Ganga in her course by arrows, was very 
much surprised. 

28. Shantanu had seen him only once, a 
few minutes after his birth ; therefore, he had 
not sufficient recollection to identify that 
yuuth with his son. 

29. But the youth, as soon as he saw his 
father, clouded the king’s perception by 
Maya (delusion) and instantly disappeared 
before his very sight. 

30. The king Shantanu, being much surprised
with what he saw and believing the 
youth to be his own son, said to Ganga, 
Show me the child.’ 

31. Ganga, assuming a beautiful form, 
showed him the youth decked in ornaments, 
holding him by his right hand. 

32. Shantanu could not recognise that 
beautiful lady, bedecked with ornaments and 
attired in fine robes, though he had seen her 
before. 

Ganga said 

33. O king, O best of men, the eighth 
son whom you formerly begot on me, is this. 
Know that this excellent child is expert in 
all the weapons. 

34. O great king, take him now. He 
has been carefully reared by me. O best 
of men, taking him with you, go home. 

35. This greatly energetic boy has studied 
with Vasishta all the Vedas with their Angas. 
He is skillful in all the weapons, lie he is a great 
bow-man, he is like Indra himself in battle, 

36. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
both the celestials and the A suras look on 
him with favour. Whatever the Vedas and 
Sastras are known to Ushanas (Sukra) are 
all known to this boy. 

37. All the Vedas and Sastras that are 
known by the son of Angirasa (Vrihaspati), 
adored of the celestials and Asuras, he is 
master of them all. 

38—39. All the weapons that were known 
to the powerful and invincible son of 
Jamadagni (Parushurama) are fully and 
completely known to your this illustrious 
and mighty-armed son. O king, this boy is 
a great bow-man, and learned in the treatises 
on the duties of kings. O hero, take home 
your this heroic son given by me. 

Vaishampayana said 

40. Having been thus commanded by 
her (Ganga), Shantanu took his son, as 
effulgent as the sun, and started for his 
own capital. 

41. Having reached the city which was 
like the City of lndra, the descendant of Puru 
(Shantanu) considered himself very fortunate, 
and successful in his wishes. 

42. He then installed his accomplished 
and illustrious son as his heir-apparent for 
the protection of the kingdom of the 
Kurus. 

43. O best of the Bharatas, the illustri¬ 
ous son soon pleased his father, and all the 
members of his family. He pleased all the 
subjects of his kingdom by his conduct. 

44. The greatly powerful king lived 
happily with his son for four years. 

45. Once on a time, he went to a forest 
on the banks of the river, named Jamuna . 
When the king was roaming there, he perceived
a sweet scent coming from an 
unknown direction. 

46. Being desirous of finding out its 
cause, he wandered about hither and thither ; 
and (at last) he saw a maiden of celestial 
beauty, belonging to the fishermen class. 

47. Having seen her, he asked that black- 
eyed maiden, “ O timid maiden, who are 
you ? What are you doing here? " 

48. She said, “ Blessing be upon you! 
I am the daughter of the chief of the fishermen 
By the command of my father I am 
engaged to row this boat to take people 
across this river for religious merits." 

49. Having seen her endued with celestial
beauty, amiableness and fragrance, the 
king Shantanu desired to possess her. 

50. He went to her father arid asked 
him to bestow her upon him. He desired 
to know whether he was willing to give her 
in marriage. 

51. The chief of the fishermen replied to 
the king saying, ‘As soon as that best of 
beautiful girls was born, it was understood 
by me that she should be bestowed (on 
some one). But, O king, hear the desire 
that I have in my heart. 

$2. O sinless one, if you desire to make 
her your lawful wife,—you are truthful,— 
then truly give me a pledge. 

53. O king, if you give me the pledge, 
I shall then bestow my daughter on you, 
for I can never obtain a husband for her 
like you." 

Shantanu said 

54. O fisherman, after hearing what you 
ask, I can then say whether I will be able 
to grant it or not. If it is capable of being 
granted, I shall certainly grant it. 

The fisherman said:— 

55. O king, the son that will be born of 
this girl shall be installed on your throne, 
and none else shall you make your succesor. 

Vaishampayana said 

56. O descendant of Bharata race, Santanu 
became unwiiling to grant the wish of 
the fisherman, though his body was being 
burnt by the fire of desire. 

57. That lord of the earth returned to 
Hastinapur, thinking of the daughter of the 
fisherman, and his heart afflicted by desire. 

58. One day when he was thus meditating
over (the girl) in sorrow, his son 
Devavrata came to him and said, 

59. “All is prosperity with you; all chiefs 
and potentates obey you, why then you 
grieve thus in sorrow ? 

60. O king, deep in your own thoughts, 
you do not speak a word to me in reply. 
You do not now go out on horse back. You 
are pale and emaciated and discoloured. 

61. I wish to know the disease from 
which you suffer, so that I may try to get 
a remedy." Having been thus addressed 
by his son, Shantanu replied— 

62. “Truly I am melancholy. Hear why 
I am so. O descendant of Bharata race, 
you are the only scion in this our great 
dynasty. 

63. You are always engaged in the sports 
of arms and achievements of power. O son, 
I am, however, always thinking of the  
instability of life. 

64. O son of Ganga, if anything happens 
to you, we shall be sonless, and we shall 
have no descendants. Truly you alone are 
equal to one hundred best sons. 

65. I do not, therefore, desire to marry 
again. I only desire that prosperity may 
always attend on you, so that our dynasty 
may be perpetuated. 

66—67. The religious men say that he 
who has one son has no son at all. The 
Agnihotra (fire worship) and three classes 
of study do not yield the one sixteenth part 
of the religious merits as are derived by the 
birth of a son. There is hardly any difference
in this respect between men and other 
animals. 

68. I have no doubt that he who has got 
a son gains heaven. The three Vedas, which 
are the roots of the Puranas, and which are 
authoritative even to the celestials, contain 
many proofs of this. 

69. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
you are a hero of excitable temper ; and you 
are always engaged in the exercises of arms. 
There is every likelihood of your being 
killed on the field of battle. 

70. If it so happens, what would be the 
state of our race ! For this reason I am 
melancholy. ! have now told you the cause 
of my sorrow ! 

Vaishampayana said 

71. Having heard the cause (of his 
grief) from the king, the greatly intelligent 
and wise Devavrata thought for a while. 

72. He then went to the old minister, 
devoted to his father’s welfare. He asked 
him the cause of his father’s sorrow. 

73. O best of the Bharata race, that 
foremost of the Kurus asked him all about 
it, and he then heard from him about the 
pledge regarding the maiden. 

74. Thereupon, Devavrata, accompanied 
with many venerable Kshatriya chiefs, went 
to the chief of the fishermen and begged his 
daiighter for his father. 

75. The fisherman received him with all 
due adorations. O descendant of the Bharata 
race, when the prince was seated, he 
addressed him thus.— 

76. "O best of the Bharata race, you 
are the lord of great prowess, you are the 
best of weilders of arms, you are the only 
son of Shantanu. But I have something to 
tell you. 

77. If the bride's father be Indra himself
still he is to repent for rejecting such an 
exceedingly honourable and desirable 
proposal of marriage. 

78. The great man from whose seed was 
born this most beautiful maiden Satyavati 
is equal to you in virtue.

79. He has many times recounted to me 
the great achievements of your father. He 
has told me that, that virtuous king is worthy 
of marrying Satyavati. 

80. Allow me to tell you that I have 
formerly rejected the offer of that best of 
Brahmarshis, the celestial sage Ashita, who 
had often asked Satyavati in marriage. 

81. O king, I have only one word to say 
on behalf of this maiden as her father. The 
only strong objection in this matter is the 
fact of a rival in a co-wife’s son. 

82. O chastiser of foes, he is not safe, 
even he be an Asura or a Gandharva, who 
has a rival in you. He will never live long 
if you grow angry. 

83. O king, this is the only objection in 
the marriage. There is no other. O chastiser 
of foes, know, this is all l have to say in 
the matter of bestowal (of Satyavati)" 

Vaishampayana said 

84. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
having been thus addressed, the son of 
Ganga (Devavrata) replied to him in the 
hearing of all the chiefs and potentates (or 
the sake of his father. 

Bhishma said:— 

85. O foremost of truthful men, listen 
to the vow I take to-day. There is none 
born or will be born who will have the 
courage to take such a vow. 

86. I shall do what you demand. The 
son that will be born of this maiden will be 
our king. 

Vaishampayana said 

87. O best of the Bharata race, having 
been thus addressed (by Bishma), the chief 
of the fishermen, desirous of achieving the 
difficult matter of making his daughter’s 
son king, thus spoke to him. 

The Fisherman said:— 

88. “O virtuous-minded man, you have 
come here as the full manager of your greatly glorious father. 
Be also the sole manager 
on my behalf in the matter of the 
bestowal of this girl. 

89. O gentle Sir, there is something else 
to be said, and something else to be done. 
O chastiser of foes, those that have daughter 
must say what I say. 

90. O devotee of the religion of truth, 
the pledge that you have taken in the midst 
of these chiefs for the sake of Satyavati is 
worthy of you. 

91. I have not the least doubt that it 
will never be violated by you. But I have 
great doubt in respect of your sons. 

Vaishampayana said -

92. O king, the devotee of religion of 
truth, (Devavrata), knowing the scruple of 
the fisherman, and being moved by the 
desire of doing good to his father then said. 

Devavrata said 

93. O chief of the fishermen, O best of 
chiefs, hear what I say for the sake 
of my father before all these chiefs and 
potentates. 

94. O chiefs and potentates, I 
relinquished my right to the throne a few 
moments before. I shall now settle the 
doubt that has arisen in respect to my 
sons. 

95. O fisherman, from this day I adopt 
the vow of Brahmacharya. If I die sonless, 
still I shall ascend to the regions of the 
everlasting bliss. 

Vaishampayana said 

96. Having heard those words, the hair 
of the fisherman stood erect in delight, 
and he said, "I bestow my daughter."

97. Thereupon the Apsaras, the celestials 
and the various classes of Rishis, began 
to pour down flowers from the firmament 
(upon the head of Devavrata), and they all 
exclaimed. “ This man is Bhishma (the 
terrible.)" 

98. He (Bhishma), then for the sake of 
his father, addressed the illustrious (lady) 
thus,  O mother, ascend this chariot, and 
let us go to our home." 

Vaishampayana said 

99. Having said this, Bhishma made the 
beautiful maiden ascend his car. Then 
coming to Hastinapur, he told Shantanu all 
that had happened. 

100. All the assembled chiefs and poten¬ 
tates applauded him jointly and individually 
for his great act. They exclaimed "He is 
(really) Bhishma." 

101. Having heard the great deed 
performed by his son Bhishma, Shantanu 
gave that illustrious man the boon of dying 
at will. 

thus ends the hundredth chapter, the 
acquirement of Satyavati, in the Sambhava 
of the Adi Parva . 


Section 101

(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O king, after the conclusion of the 
marriage, the king Shantanu installed that 
beautiful lady in his household. 

2. Thereupon, the wise Shantanu begot 
on his wife Satyavati a very powerful hero, 
named Chitrangada, the best of men. 

3. The powerful king begot on Satyavati 
another son, named Vichilravirja, who 
became a mighty bow-man ; and he became 
king after his father. 

4. Before that best of men, Vichitravirya, 
had attained the majority, his father succumbed 
to the inevitable influence of Time. 

5. When Shantanu went to heaven; 
Bhishma, who was always obedient to Satyavati,
installed that chastiser of foes, Chitrangadha 
on the throne. 

6. Chitrangada also defeated all the kings 
of the world by his prowess. He could not 
find any equal of him among men. 

7. Seeing him defeat men, Astiras, and 
even the celestials, the powerful king of the 
Gandharvas, who bore the same name with 
him, came to him for a fight. 

8. Between that foremost of the Kurus 
and the powerful Gandharva chief, a fearful 
combat took place on the field of Kurukshetra. 
The combat lasted for three long years on 
the banks of the Saraswati . 

9. In that fierce encounter, which was 
covered with showers of weapons, the best of 
the Kurus was killed, by the Gandharva 
through his greater prowess or power of 
Maya (illusion). 

10. Having killed that best of men, the 
chastiser of foes, Chitrangada, the Ghan- 
dharva went to heaven. 

11. When that best of men, the greatly 
pewerful prince, was killed, the son of 
Shantanu performed all his obsequies. 

12. Thereupon, he installed the mighty 
armed boy Vichitravirya, still in his minority, 
on the throne of the Kuru kingdom. 

13. Vichitravirya, ever obedient to 
Bhishma, ruled the kingdom of his father 
and grand-sires. 

14. He adopted the son of Shantanu, 
Bhishma, learned in the Sastras of religion 
and law. He too protected him very 
virtuously. 

thus ends the hundred and first Section , 
the history of the Chitrangada in the 
Adi Parva . 

Section 102

(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O descendant of the Kuru race, 
Chitrangada, having been killed and his 
brother being minor, Bhishma, ever obedient 
to Satyavati, ruled over the kingdom. 

2. When that best of all intelligent men, 
Bhishma, saw that his brother Vichitravirya
had attained majority (youth), he thought 
of marrying him. 

3. O king, he heard that three daughters 
of the king of Kashi, all equal to the Apsaras 
in beauty, would be married at a Swayamvara. 

4. Thereupon, that best of car-warriors, 
that chastiser of foes, that Lord (Bhishma), 
riding on a single car, went at the command 
of his mother to the city of Varanashi 
(Kashi). 

5. There the son of Shantanu, Bhishma, 
saw that many kings and potentates had 
come from all directions. He also saw those 
three maidens. 

6. When the kings were being mentioned 
by name, Bhishma, the lord, chose himself 
those maidens (for his brother.) 

7. O king, taking those maidens on his 
chariot, the best of warriors, Bhishma, 
spoke to the (assembled) kings in a voice 
like the roars of the clouds. 

Bhishma said 

8. The wise have said that after inviting 
an accomplished man, a maiden may be 
bestowed on him decked with ornaments 
and accompanied with valuable presents 
as much as lie in the power of the bestower 
to give. 

9. Others may bestow their daughters 
by accepting a couple of kine. Some again 
may bestow their daughters by taking a 
fixed sum, and some again take away 
maidens by force. 

10. Some marry with the consent of the 
maidens and some by dragging them into 
consent. Some by obtaining tneir parents’ 
consent, some again obtain wives as presents.

11—12. The learned men praise the eighth 
form of marriage, but the Swayamvara is 
highly spoken of by the kings. But the 
sages have said that the wife taken by force 
amidst an assemblage of kings after defeating 
them is to be highly prized. Therefore, 
O kings, I carry away these maidens by 
force. Try with all your strength to defeat 
fne, or be defeated. 

13. O kings, I stand here, resolved to 
fight.” 

Vaishampayana said 

Having said this to the kings and the 
king of Kashi, the greatly powerful 

14. Kuru prince took up those maidens 
on his car. Having thus taken them on his 
car and having challenged them (the chiefs) 
to fight, he sped his chariot away. 

15. Thereupon all the kings stood up in 
anger; they slapped their arms and bit their 
nether lips. 

16. Their great hurry in casting off their 
ornaments and putting on their armours 
produced a loud uproar. 

17. O Janamejaya, their ornaments and 
armours resembled like the meteoric flashes 
in the sky. 

18. With their brows contracted and 
eyes red in anger, they moved in impatience, 
their ornaments and armours dangling 
with their agitated steps. 

19. The charioteers soon brought hand¬ 
some cars, yoked with fine horses. Those 
heroes, armed with all kinds of weapons 
then got on those cars. 

20. They pursued the retreating chief of 
the Kurus. O descendant of the Bharata 
race, then occurred that wonderful fight, 

21—22. That hair-stirring battle in which 
innumerable kings were on one side and only 
one was on the other. The kings hurled at 
their foe ten thousands arrows at the same 
time. Bhishma, however, stopped their 
memberless arrows before they could fall 
upon him by a counter shower of his own 
arrows as numerous as the down of the 
body. 

23. Thereupon, the kings surrounded 
him on all sides and rained upon him a 
shower of arrows like masses of clouds 
showering on the mountains. 

24. He (Bhishma), stopping that shower 
of arrows by his own, wounded each of the 
kings with three arrows. 

25. O king, the kings wounded Bhishma 
each with five arrows, but he stopped the 
attacking kings each with two arrows. 

26. The battle became so fierce with the 
dense shower of arrows that it looked like the 
battle between the Devas and the Danavas. 
And even brave men were struck with fear 
to look at it. 

27. (Bhishma) cut off by his arrows 
flag staffs, armours and human heads by 
hundreds and thousands on the field of 
battle. 

28. Such was his prowess and extraordi¬ 
nary lightness of hand, such was the skill 
with which he protected himself, that the 
fighting car-warriors, though his enemies, 
loudly applauded him. 

29. That foremost of all experts in arms 
(Bhishma), having defeated all the kings in 
battle and having taken the maidens with 
him, went towards the capital of the 
Bharatas. 

30. O king, then the great car-warrior 
king Shalya, challenged from behind the son 
of Shantanu, Bishma, to a combat. 

3t—32. Desirous of securing the maidens 
he came upon Bhishma like a powerful 
leader of elephants, rushing upon another of 
its kinds and tearing with its tusk its 
opponent’s thigh at the sight of a female. 
That mighty armed king Shalya cried in 
wrath to Bhishma, “Stay, Stay.” 

33. Then the best of men, Bhishma that 
destroyer of hostile army, provoked by his 
words, flamed up in anger like a blazing 
fire. 

34. Bow in hand, his brow farrowed 
into wrinkles, he stopped his car in obedience 
to the Kshatriya usage and stayed 
there in expectation of the enemy. 

35. The great car-warrior stopped his 
car for Shalya and all the kings also stood 
there to see him stop. They wished to see 
the coming combat between Bhishma and 
Shalya, 

36. The two (heroes) then began to show 
their prowess on each other like two roaring 
bulls of great strength fighting at the sight 
of a cow. 

37. The best of men, king Shalya, covered 
the son of Shantanu, Bhishma, with hundreds 
and thousands of swift-winged arrows. 

38. The kings, seeing that Shalya was 
covering Bhishma at the very outset of the 
combat with innumerable arrows, were much 
astonished, and they all cried “Blessed, 
Blessed.” 

39. Seeing him very light-handed in 
battle, all the kings applauded in delight 
the king of men, Shalya. 

40. Hearing these shouts of the Kshatriyas,
the subjugator of hostile towns, the son 
of Shantanu, Bhishma, exclaimed, “ Stay, 
Stay. ” 

41. He (Bhishma) commanded his char¬ 
ioteer in anger, saying,” Lead the car where 
the king (Shalya) is. I shall instantly kill him 
as Garuda kills a serpent.” 

42. O King, the Kuru prince then 
attached the Varuna weapon to his bow 
string, and he wounded with it the four 
steeds of king Shalya. 

43. O best of Kings, the Kuru prince, 
warding off with his weapons those of his 
foe, killed king Shalya’s charioteer. 

44  The best of men, the son of Shantanu, 
Bhishma, for the sake of the maidens, killed 
the excellent steed (of his adversary) by the 
Aindra weapon. 

45. He then defeated that best of kings, 
(Shalya), but allowed him to escape with his 
life. O best of the Bharata race, thereupon, 
Shalya went away to his own kingdom. 

46. Having returned to his capital, he 
virtuously ruled over his people ; and O 
subjugator of hostile towns, the kings also who 
came to the Sayambara returned to their own 
capitals. 

47. After defeating the kings, the best of 
all weilders of arms, Bhishma, went with the 
maidens to Hastinapur, where was that king 
of the Kurus, 

48. Vichitravirya, who ruled the world 
virtuously like his father the Kuru prince 
and the best of all monarchs Shantanu.

49  O king, within a very short time, he 
(Bhishma) passed many forests, rivers, hills 
and woods with various trees. 

50. The son, of the ocean-going river 
(Ganga) of immeasurable prowess in battle, 
killing numberless men, but having no scar 
on his own body, brought the daughters of 
the king of Kashi 

51. As tenderly, as if they were his own 
daughters-in-law, sisters or daughters. 
Bringing them as his daughters, he presented
them to the Kurus. 

52. That mighty armed hero wishing 
his brother's welfare brought those greatly 
accomplished maidens and then offered 
them to his brother. 

53 — 55  Bishma gave to Vichitravirya 
the maidens who were brought by his 
prowess. The virtuous man (Bhishma), having 
achieved this extraordinary deed according 
to kingly custom, began to make prepara¬ 
tions for his brother’s marriage. Having 
consulted with Satyavati everything about 
the wedding was settled by Bhishma ; but 
the eldest daughter of the king of Kashi, 
softly smiling, spoke thus, 

56. “I have chosen in my heart the king 
of Saubha as my husband. He too has in 
his heart accepted me as his wife. This is 
also agreeable to my father. 

57. I would have also chosen Shalya 
in the Swayamvara as my husband. You are 
learned in the precepts of virtue. Knowing 
all this do, what you think proper.” 

58. thus addressed by that maiden 
before the Brahmanas, the heroic Bhishma 
began to reflect what should be done. 

59. The greatly virtuous man, after 
consulting 1 with the Brahmanas learned in 
the Vedas, allowed the eldest daughter of 
the king of Kashi, Amba, to do what she 
liked. 

60. Bhishma then bestowed (the two 
princesses) Ambika and Ambalika on his 
younger brother Vichitravirya according to 
the ordained rites. 

61. After having married them, Vichitravirya, 
though he was virtuous-minded, 
became lustful from his prime of youth. 

62. They were both of tall stature ; their 
heads were covered with black curly hair, 
their finger nails were red and high; they 
had beautiful rising breasts and hips. 

63. The beautiful and amiable damsels, 
endued with every auspicious mark, 
considered their husband Vichitravirya in every 
war worthy of them; and they loved and 
respected him. 

64. He (Vichitravirya) too, endued as 
he was with the beauty of the Aswinis and 
the prowess of the celestials, could steal the 
hearts of all women. 

6$. That king of the world, Vichitravirya, 
enjoyed with his wives uninterruptedly for 
seven years, and he was then attacked by 
consumption, though he was still in the 
prime of youth. 

66. His friends and relatives tried to effect 
a cure in consultation with the physicians, 
but (in spite of all their efforts), the Kuru 
prince went to the abode of Yama like a 
setting son. 

67—68. The virtuous-minded son of 
Ganga (Bhishma) became plunged in anxiety 
and grief. Bhishma with all tne other chief 
Kurus, in consultation with Satyavati, then 
caused the obsequies of (the deceased) Vichitravirya
to be performed by learned priests 

thus ends the hundred and second chapter, 
the death of Vichitravirya , in the Sambnava 
of the Adi Parva . 


Section 103

(SHAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. The unfortunate and miserable Satyavati, 
plunged in grief for her son, performed 
with her daughters-in-law the obsequial rites 
of her son. 

2. The amiable lady then consoled her 
two daughtcrs-in-law and the foremost of 
all wielders of arms Bhishma; Then turning 
her mind on virtue and on the paternal and 
maternal lines, the illustrious lady thus 
addressed the son of Ganga, 

3. "The funeral cake, the achievement 
and the perpetuation of the Kuru dynasty 
and of the line of the illustrious and virtuous 
Shantanu all depend upon you. 

4. As the attainment of heaven is certain 
from good deeds, as long life is certain from 
truth, so virtue is certainly inseparable from 
you. 

5. O virtuous man, you are well 
acquainted with the precepts of virtue, both 
in abstract and in detail. You are learned in 
the various Srutis and in all the branches of 
the Vedas. 

6. I know you are like Indra and Angiras 
in firmness, in virtues, in preserving family
customs and in the presence of mind. 

7. therefore, O best of virtuous men, 
greatly relying on you, I shall appoint you 
to do a certain act. Hearing it, you should 
do it. 

8 O descendant of Bharata race, the 
wives of your brother, the beautiful daughters 
of the king of Kashi, both possessing beauty 
and youth, are desirous of offspring. 

9. O best of men, my son and your 
brother, endued with great progress and 
dear to you, has gone to heaven when he 
was a boy. 

10. O mighty-armed hero, therefore, 
beget at my command, offspring on them 
for the perpetuation of our dynasty. You 
should perform this virtuous act. 

ti. Install yourself on the throne of the 
kingdom and rule the domain of the 
Bharatas. Marry wife according to the 
rites. Do not sink your ancestors in hell.” 

Vaishampayana said 

12. thus addressed by his mother, 
relatives and friends, the chastiser of 
foes, the virtuous-minded (Bhishma) said the 
following comformable to the dictates of 
virtues, 

13. "O mother, what you say is certainly 
sanctioned by religion. But you know my 
vow as regards begetting children. 

14. O mother Satyavati, you know also 
what took place in connection with thy 
bestowal. 1 now repeat the pledge I once 
gave. 

15. I can renounce the three worlds, I 
can renounce the kingdom of heaven or 
anything that may be greater than the both; 
but I can never renounce truth. 

16. Earth may renounce her scent, 
water may renounce its moisture, light may 
renounce its attribute of exhibitting forms, 
the wind may renounce its attribute of 
being perceivable by the touch. 

17. The sun may renounce its glory, 
comet its heat, the sky its sound, moon its 
cool rays, 

18. The slayer of Vitra (Indra) may 
renounce his prowess and the king of 
justice his impartiality, but I cannot 
renounce truth' 

19. Having been thus addressed by her 
son, endued with great effulgence, mother 
Satyavati then replied to Bhishma, 

20. O hero whose strength is truth, I 
know you are devoted to truth. If you like, 
you can create another three worlds out of 
your great energy. 

21. I know what was your vow on my 
account. But taking into your consideration
the emergency, bear the burden of duty 
you owe towards your ancestors. 

22. O chastiser of foes, act in a way so 
that virtue is not destroyed, and so that the 
thread of our race is not broken, and our 
friends and relatives may not grieve.” 

23. Having been thus again and again 
urged by his miserable and son-bereaved 
mother (Satyavati), with words inconsistent 
with virtue, Bhishma said, 

24. 14 O queen, turn your eyes on virtue. 
Do not destroy us all. The violation of truth 
in Kshatriyas is never praised in the 
scriptures. 

25. O queen, I shall tell you the 
everlasting usage of the Kshatriyas, to which 
recourse may be had in order to prevent 
the line of Shantanu from being extinct. 

26. Hearing it, consider what should be 
done, in consultation with the priests and 
those wise men who know what practices are 
allowable in the time of emergency and 
distress. Forget not the ordinary course 
of social conduct." 

thus ends the hundred and third chapter, 
the colloquy between Bhishma and Satyavati, 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 104

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued, 

Bhishma said 

1. The king Haihayas was killed by 
(Parashu) Rama, the son of Jamadagni, 
with his battle axe from his anger at the 
death of his father. 

2. Cutting off one thousand arms of 
Arjuna (Haihayas), he achieved a most 
difficult feat in the world. 

3. He set out on his car to conquer the 
world ; and taking up his bow, he hurled his 
mighty weapons to exterminate the Kshatriyas.
 
4. In olden time the illustrious descendant 
of the Brigu race, exterminated the 
Kshatriya race for twenty one times with 
his swift arrows. 

5. When the earth was thus in olden 
time made Kshatriya-less by that great 
Rishi, the Kshatriya women raised children
by the Brahmanas, learned in the 
Vedas. 

6 . They went to the Brahmanas not 
lustfully, but from virtuous motives. It is said in 
the Vedas that the son so raised belongs to 
him that had married the mother. 

7. thus it was that the Kshatriya race 
was again brought into existence all over the 
world. There is an old history in connection 
with this matter, and I shall narrate it to 
you. 

8. There was, in the time of yore, a wise 
Rishi, named Utathya. He had a wife, 
name Manata whom he dearly loved. 

9. One day Utathya's younger brother, 
the priest of the celestials, the greatly efful¬ 
gent Vrihaspati, proposed to Manata. 

10. Manata said to her Devara (husband’s 
younger brother), that best of eloquent men, 
“I am pregnant by your elder brother; therefore
you should not seek me now. 

11. O illustrious Vrihaspati, the child, 
who is now in my womb, has studied there 
the Vedas with their six Angas. 

12. Your seed is also infallible. How is it 
possible for two children to live there at the 
same time? therefore, you should not 
desire me to-day." 

13. Having been thus addressed by her, 
Vrihaspati, though greatly intelligent, could 
not suppress his desire. 

21. From the curse of the Rishi Vrihaspati
Utathya’s son, as illustrious and as 
effulgent as Vrihaspati, was born blind ; and 
he was named Dirghatamas (enveloped in 
perpetual darkness.) 

22. The born-blind, Veda-knowing and 
greatly w'ise Rishi obtained for his wife by 
his learning a young and handsome Brahmana
maiden, named Pradweshi. 

23. He begot on her Gautama and other 
sons in order to keep up the illustrious line of 
Utathya's race. But Gautama and others 
were all covetous and fools. 

24. The virtuous-minded, high-souled 
and learned in the Vedas and Vedangas, 
(Dirghatamas) learnt from Suravi’s son the 
practices of the cow race, and he began 
publicly to commit the vice. 

25. The excellent Rishis, the dewellers of 
the same hermitage, became indignant to 
see him transgress all propriety. 

26. They said, 11 This man transgresses 
all propriety. He deserves not to live in the 
hermitage. We shall all renounce this sinful
wretch.” 

27. They said many things else
regarding the Rishi Dirghatamas. His wife 
also, having (already) obtained sons, was not 
pleased with him. The husband then 
addressing his wife Pradweshi said, “ Why 
are you dissatisfied with me ?” 

Pradweshi said 

28. The husband is called Bhatri 
because he supports his wife ; he is called 
Pati, because he protects her, but you are 
neither to me. O great ascetic, as you are 
blind from your birth, it is I who have 
supported you and your children. But I 
shall do it no longer. 

Bhishma said 

29. Having heard her words, the Rishi 
became angry, and he said to his wife 
Pradweshi and her sons "Take me to 
the Kshatriyas (kings) and you will then be 
rich."

Pradweshi said 

30. O Brahmana, I do not desire to 
possess the wealth, earned by you, which 
would always be the cause of misery. O 
best of Brahmanas, do what you like ; 1 
shall not support you as I did before. 

Dirghatamas said 

31. From this day I make this rule 
among men that every woman shall stick 
to one husband only all through her life. 

32. Whether the husband is dead, or 
whether he is alive, she must not have 
connection with another man. She, who will 
have it, will be considered as fallen. A 
woman without a husband will always be 
liable to be sinful. Even if she is wealthy, 
she will not be able to enjoy it truly. 

33. Calumny and evil report will always 
follow her. 

Bhishma said : — 

Having heard these words, the Brah¬ 
mana lady became exceedingly angry 
and said, "O sons, throw him into the 
Ganges."

34—35. Her avaricious and foolish sons, 
Gautama and his brothers, exclaimed, 
"Why should we support this blind old 
man? Thus thinking, those wicked men 
tied him on a raft and threw him into the 
Ganges. They then returned home. 

36. The Brahmana, drifting along the 
stream on that raft, passed through the 
territories of many kings. 

37. One day a king, named Vali, learned 
in all the precepts of religion, saw him (the 
blind Rishi) drifting along the stream and 
approaching near him. 

38. O best of the Bharata race, the 
virtuous-minded Vali, whose strength was 
truth, knowing who he was, took him up 
(from the stream) for the purpose of raising 
up offspring. He said. 

39. "O illustrious man, I have to raise 
up a few sons on my wife. therefore, beget 
on her some virtuous and wise sons.” 

40. thus addressed, the greatly effulgent 
Rishi said to him, “ Be it so.” Thereupon, 
that king sent his wife Sudeshna to him. 

41. That lady, knowing him to be blind 
and old, did not go to him. She sent to him 
her old nurse. 

42. The virtuous-minded Rishi begot on 
that Sudra woman eleven sons. 

43. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
seeing all those sons, Kakshivata being their 
eldest, who studied all the Vedas, the king 
one day asked the Rishi, "Are these sons 
mine ?” 

44. The great Rishi said to him, "No. 
they are mine. I have begotten Kakshivata 
and others on a Sudra woman. 

45. Your queen, Sudeshna, finding me 
old and blind, the foolish woman, insulted roc 
(by not coming herself) and sent her nurse 
to me. 

46. He (the king) then gratified the 
excellent Rishi and sent his wife, Sudeshna, 
again to him. 

47. Dhirghatama touched that lady's 
body and told her, "You will give birth to 
sons, as effulgent as the sun, 

48. Namely, Anga, Vanga, Kalinga 
Pundra and Sunga. Five countries will 
be named on earth after their names. 

49. From Anga a country will be called 
Anga, from Vanga one Vanga, from 
Kalinga one Kalinga, 

50. From Pundra one Pundra, and 
from Sunga one Sunga. It was thus the 
line of Vali was pepetuated by the Rishi. 

51. It was thus that many virtuous, 
greatly energetic and exceedingly strong 
bow-men, Kshatriyas, were born from the 
Brahmanas. Hearing this, O mother, do as 
you like in this matter. 

thus ends the hundred and fourth 
Section , the colloquy between Bhishma and 
Satyavati, in the Sambhava, of the Adi 
Parva.


Section 105

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Bhishma said 

1. O mother, listen to me, I shall point 
out the means by which the Bharata dynasty 
may be perpetuated. 

2. Let an accomplished Brahmana be 
invited with the offer of wealth; let him 
beget offspring on the wives of Vichitravirya. 

Vaishampayana said 

3. Then Satyavati thus spoke to 
Bhishma, smiling softly and speaking in 
bashlui voice. 

Satyavati said 

4. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
what you say is true. From my confidence 
in you, I shall now point out the means of 
perpetuating our dynasty. 

5. You shall not be able to reject it, 
learned as you are in the practices permitted 
in the time of distress. You are Virtue, you 
are Truth, 

6. therefore, hearing what I say, do 
what is proper. My father was a virtuous 
man, and for virtue’s sake he had kept a 
boat (for crossing people.) 

7. In the prime of my youth, I went one 
day to ply that boat. It so happened that 
the great and wise Rishi Parasara, the fore 
most of all virtuous men, came on my 
boat for crossing the famuna, 

8. As I was taking him across the river, 
that best of Rishis became full of desire and 
began to address me in soft words. 

9. O descendant of Bharata, I was afraid 
of my father, but l was also greatly afraid of 
the Rishi’s curse. therefore, having got 
from him a great boon, 1 could not refuse 
his request. 

10. O descendant of the Bharata race, he 
overpowered me,—a mere girl,—by his great 
effulgence, and he also enveloped the region 
with a thick fog. 

it. There was in my body a revolting 
odour of fish before, but the Rishi dispelled it 
and gave me my this fragrance. 

12. The Rishi told me, “After bringing 
forth this child on the island of this river, 
you will still remain a virgin. 

13. The son of Parasara, thus born of 
me in my maiden-hood, has become a great 
ascetic, named Dwaipayana. 

14. That illustrious Rishi, having divided 
by his ascetic power the Vedas into four 
parts, has become known on earth as Vyasa, 
and for his black colour as Krishna. 

15. He is truthful, free from passions, and 
a great ascetic who has destroyed all his sins; 
he went away with his great father as soon 
as he was born. 

16. Asked by me and also by you, that 
Rishi of incomparable effulgence will surely 
beget excellent offspring on the wives of 
your brother. 

17. He told me, “Mother, think of me 
(mentally call me) when you will be in 
difficulty. O mighty-armed Bhishma, if you 
wish, I can now think of him." 

13. O Bhishma if you are willing and if 
you appoint him, I am sure that great ascetic 
will beget children on the wives of Vichitravirya

Vaishampayana said 

19-—20. When the great Rishi was thus 
mentioned, Bhishma with joined hands said. 
“That man is truly intelligent who fixes his 
eyes judiciously on Dharma , Artha , and 
Kama , and who, after reflecting with 
patience, acts in such a way as virtue 
(Dharma ) may lead to future virtue, profit 
{Artha) to future profit and pleasue (Kama) 
to future pleasure. 

21 therefore, that which has been said by 
you, and that which, besides being beneficial 
to us is consistent with virtue, is certainly the 
best advice, and it has my full approval." 

Vaishampayana said 

22. O descendant of the Kuru race, when 
Bhishma said this, Kali (Satyavati) thought 
of the Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana. 

23. Dwaipayana, who was then interpre¬ 
ting the Vedas, came at once to his mother 
without any body knowing it, as soon as he 
found that he had been thought of. 

24. She (Satyavati), having welcomed her 
son in all due form, embraced him with her 
arms and bathed him with her tears. 

25. The daughter of the fisherman 
(Satyavati) shed much tears to see her son 
after a long time. Having seen her weep, 
the great Rishi, Vyasa, her eldest son, 
washed her (face) with cool water ; and 
bowing to his mother, he said, 

26. “O mother, I have come to fulfill 
your wishes. therefore, O virtuous lady, 
command me without delay. I shall accomplish 
what you desire." 

27 . The priest (of the Bharatas) then 
worshipped the great Rishi in the proper 
form, and the Rishi accepted the offerings of 
the worship with uttering the usual Mantras, 

28—29. Being pleased with the due 
worship with the proper Mantras, he took his 
seat. His mother, Satyavati, seeing him 
conformably seated, asked his welfare and 
made the usual enquiries. She then said, 
“O Kavi, (learned man), the sons derive 
their birth from both the father and the 
mother. 

30. There is no doubt that their proprietors
are both the father and the mother. 
You are my eldest son according to the 
ordinances. 

31-32. O Brahmarshi, Vichitravirya was 
my youngest son. As he was the brother of 
Bhishma by father’s side, so you are by 
the mother’s side. This is my opinion, I do 
not know what is your opinion. This 
Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, who is devoted 
to truth, does not. for the sake of truth, wish 
to beget children or to rule the kingdom. 

33. therefore, O sinless one, for the 
sake of the affection you bear for 
your brother (Vichitravirya), for the sake of 
perpetuating the dynasty of Shantanu, for the 
sake of Bhishma and my request, 

34.. For the sake of the kindness you 
bear for all creatures, for the sake of the 
protection of people, and for the sake of the 
liberality of your heart you should do what I 
say. Your younger brother has left two young 
wives, like the daughters of the celestials. 

35. They possess beauty and youth, and 
they wish to have sons from the desire of 
getting virtue. O son, therefore, beget on 
them sons worthy of our dynesty and for 
the continuance of our line,” 

Vyasa said 

36. O (mother) Satyavati, you know 
what is virtue, both as regards this world 
and the next. O lady of great wisdom, your 
mind is also fixed on virtue. 

37. therefore, making virtue my motive, 
I shall, at your command, do what you desire, 
knowing (as I do) that this practice is 
conformable to the true and eternal religion. 

38—39. I shall produce for my brother 
sons that will be like Yama and Varuna. 
therefore, let the ladies observe the vow I 
indicate for one full year. They will be then 
purified. No - woman must come to me 
without having observed a rigid vow. 

Satyavati said 

40. Take such steps as the ladies may 
conceive to-day. The people perish in a 
kingdom where there is anarchy. Sacrifice 
and other holy acts are destroyed, the rains 
and the celestials disappear from that 
place, 

41. O Lord, how can a kingdom be 
protected without a king ? therefore, see that 
the ladies conceive. Bhishma will watch 
over the children in their womb, 

Vyasa said 

42. If I am to produce sons for my brother 
so unseasonably then let the ladies tolerate 
my ugliness. That will be to them a great 
penance. 

43  If the princess of Koshala can bear 
my strong odour, my ugly and grim visage 
my attire and body, she will then conceive 
an excellent son. 

Vaishampayana said 

44 — 45  Having thus spoken to Satya¬ 
vati, the greatly effulgent Vyasa said to 
her, “Let the princess of Koshala adorned 
with ornaments wait for me in her bed 
room in dear attire. (So saying) he 
(immediately) disappeared. Satyavati then 
went to her daughter-in-law, and in private, 

46. Spoke to her these words of beneficial
and virtuous import, O princess of 
Koshala, hear what I say. It is consistent 
with virtue. 

47. On account of my bad fate, the 
Bharata dynasty has become , extinct. Seeing 
me agrieved and the extinction of his 
paternal line, 

48. The wise Bhishma, with the desire of 
perpetuating our race his made to me a 
suggestion. But, O daughter, its accomplishment
depends on you. Accomplish it, and 
restore the lost line of the Bharatas. 

49 O beautiful girl, bring forth a son as 
effulgent as the king of the celestials. He 
will bear the heavy burden of our this 
heriditary kingdom. 

50, She (Satyavati,) having succeeded 
somehow in getting the consent of that 
virtuous lady to her proposal which was 
consistent to religion, fed Brahmanas, Devarshis 
and guests. 

thus ends the hundred and the fifth 
Section , the advice of Satyavati, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Pirva, 


Section 106
(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued 

Vaishampayana said 

1. When her daughter-in-law performed 
her purifying bath after her season, Satyavati
led her to a luxurious bed-room and 
spoke to her thus, 

2. “O princess of Koshala, your husband 
has an elder brother who will to-day come 
to you. Wait for him without falling asleep." 

3. Having heard these words of her 
mother-in-law, the amiable lady, as she 
lay on her bed in her bedroom, began to 
think of Bhishma and other great Kuru 
chiefs. 

4. Then the truthful Rishi, who had 
given his promise as regards Ambika first, 
came to her bedroom while the lamp was 
burning. 

5. Seeing his dark visage, his matted 
locks of copper colour, his blazing eyes, and 
his grim beard, the lady closed her eyes in 
fear. 

6. But he (the Rishi), in order to accomplish 
his mother’s desire, united with her. 
The daughter of the king of Kashi was not 
able to open her eyes from fear. 

7. When he came out, the mother asked 
the son, “ Will the princess have an accom¬ 
plished son ?” 

8—9. Hearing his mother’s words, the son 
of Satyavati, the self-controlled and greatly 
wise Vyasa said, “The son that will be 
brought forth by the princess, will be equal 
to ten thousand elephants in strength. He 
will be learned and a great royal sage. He 
will be greatly fortunate, greatly powerful 
and vastly intelligent. 

10. The noble prince will have one thousand
sons, but for the fault of his mother, 
he will be blind.” 

11. Having. heard these words of his 
son, the mother said, “O great ascetic, how 
can one who is blind be a king, worthy of the 
Kurus? 

12. How can one who is blind can 
protect his relatives and friends and increase 
the glory of his fathers and continue the 
dynasty ? therefore, you should give another 
king to the Kuru race.” 

13. Having promised this, the illustrious 
(Vyasa) went away. In due time the 
princess of Koshala gave birth to a blind 
son, 

14. O chastiser of foes, after securing the 
consent of her daughter-in-law, Satyavati 
soon after again summoned Vyasa as she 
did before. 

15-16. Vyasa came according to his 
promise and went to the second wife (Ambalika) 
of his brother in proper form. But 
she became pale and discoloured with fear on 
seeing the Rishi. O descendant of the 
Bharata race, seeing her pale and discolured
with fear, and afflicted with grief, 

17. The son of Satyavati, Vyasa, spoke 
to her thus, “As you have become pale by 
seeing me ugly, 

18. So your son will be also pale in 
complexion. O beautiful featured lady, 
the name of your son will be accordingly 
Pandu, (pale.)” 

19. Having said this, the excellent and 
illustrious Rishi came out and met her 
mother who asked him about the child. 

20. He told her that the child will be 
pale, and his mother (Satyavati hearing 
this) begged again for another son. 

21. The Rishi replied to his mother by 
saying, “Be it so.” The lady (Ambalika) 
gave birth to a son in due time. 

22. He was of pale complexion, very 
effulgent and endued with all auspicious 
marks This son afterwards begot those 
mighty bow-men, the five Pandavas. 

23-24. (Sometime after), when her eldest 
daughter-in-law was again in her season, 
she was Asked by (Satyavati) to go to 
Vyasa. But she, endued with the beauty of a 
daughter of the celestials, remembering 
the grim vissage and strong odour of the 
great Rish, did not act according to the 
request of the lady (Satyavati) out of fear. 
Having decked a maid-servant like an 
Apsara with her ornaments 

25. The daughter of the king of Kashi 
sent her to Krishna (Vvasa). She rose up 
and saluted him as the Kishi came. 

26. After having waited upon him 
respectfully, she took her seat near him when 
asked. O king, the Rishi of rigid vows was 
greatly pleased with her. 

27. When he rose (to go away) he said, 
“O amiable girl, you shall no longer remain 
a maid-servant. Your son will be greatly 
fortunate, virtuous and the foremost of all 
intelligent men on earth.” 

28. The son of Krishna Dwaipayana 
thus born was known by the name of 
Vidura. He was thus the brother of the 
illustrious Dhritarashtra and Pandu. 

29. The God of Justice was thus born as 
Vidura in consequence of the curse of the 
Rishi Mandavya. He was free from desire 
and anger. When Krishna Dwaipayana was 
met by his mother as before, he told her, 

30. How he had been deceived by the 
eldest of the princesses and how he 
he had begotten a son on a Sudra woman. 
Having said this, he disappeared in her 
sight. 

31. thus were begotten on the field 
(wives) of Vichitravirya by Dwaipayana 
these sons, as effulgent as the celestial chilren 
the expanders of the Kuru race. 

thus ends the hundred and sixth Section , 
the bringing forth of Vichitravirya's sons
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 

Section 107

(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Janamejaya said 

1. What did Dharma (the god of 
justice) for which he was cursed ? Who was 
the Brahmana Rishi, for whose curse the 
god had to be born in the womb of a Sudra 
woman ? 

Vaishampayana said 

2 . There was a certain Brahmana, who 
was known as Mandavya. He was learned 
in all the precepts of virtue ; he was devoted 
to truth and asceticism. 

3. The great ascetic sat at the entrance of 
his hermitage, as a great Yogee with his arms 
upraised in the observance of the vow of 
silence. 

4. As he passed years together (in that 
state), one day (some) robbers came to his 
hermitage with stolen properties. 

5-6. O best of the Bharata race, they 
wore pursued by many guards-men. O 
best of the Kuru race, the thieves, entering 
that hermitage, hid their booty there. Before 
the force (guards-men) came up, they too 
hid themselves in fear. But as soon as they 
had concealed themselves, the guards in 
pursuit came to the spot. 

7. O king, the pursuers of the thieves saw 
the ascetic sitting in that state; and they 
asked him, 

8. “O excellent Brahmana, which way 
the thieves have gone? O Brahmana, point 
them to us, so that we may follow them without 
loss of time.” 

9. O king, having been thus addressed 
by the guards, the ascetic did not say a 
word in reply,—good or bad. 

10. Thereupon, the officers of the king, in 
searching that hermitage, found the thieves 
with the stolen properties concealed there. 

11. The suspicion of the guards fell upon 
the Rishi; they seized him with the thieves 
and brought him before the king. 

12. The king sentenced him along with 
the thieves The guards, acting in ignorance 
put that great Rishi also on the Sula 
(an instRuruent of death). 

13. Having put them (the thieves) and 
the Rishi on the Sula, they returned to the 
king with the stolen property they had 
recovered. 

14. Though the virtuous-minded Brahmana 
Rishi remained for many years on the 
Sula without food, yet he did not die. 

15. The illustrious man, who was in deep 
Tapa at the point of the Sula, kept up his 
life and brought other Rishis there by his 
ascetic power. 

16. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
they came in the night in the forms of birds ; 
and seeing him engaged in Tapa (ascetic 
meditation), though fixed on the Sula, they 
were extremely agrieved. 

17. Having shown themselves in their 
own forms, they asked that excellent Bramhmana, 
“O Brahmana, we desire to hear 
what is your sin for which you suffer this 
torture of being placed at the point of the 
Sula. 

thus ends the hundred and seventh 
Section , the history of Animandavya , 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 

Section 108

(SAMBHABA PARVA.)— Continued 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Thereupon, that best of Rishis thus 
replied to the ascetics, “ Whom shall I 
blame ? None is to blame. 

2. O king, the guards, having seen him 
after many days in that state, told the king 
all that had happened. 

3. Having heard their words, the king 
after consulting with his ministers, gratified 
that excellent Rishi fixed on the Sula. 

The king said 

4. O best of Rishis, I have offended 
you out of ignorance. I beseech you, pardon 
me. You should not be angry with me. 

Vaishampayana said 

5—6. Having been thus addressed by 
the king, the Rishi was gratified. Having 
thus gratified him, the king took down the 
Sula and tried to draw it out from hint but 
he was unable to do it. 

7. The Rishi in that state with Sula 
practised the austerest penances, and he thus 
conquered by his asceticism many regions 
difficult to be obtained. 

8. therefore, he was called on earth 
Animandavya. That great truth-knowing 
Brahmana (one day) went to Dharma (the 
god of justice). 

9. Seeing the god seated on his seat, 
the lord (Rishi) asked him reproachingly, 
"What is the sinful act which has been 
committed unconsciously by me 

10. For which I am suffering from this 
punishment? Tell me without delay, and 
then see my ascetic power.” 

Dharma said 

11. O ascetic, a little insect was once 
pierced by you with a blade of grass ; you 
now receive the fruit of your action. 

Animandavya said 

12. You have inflicted upon me a great 
punishment for a little fault. therefore 
0 Dharma, you will be born as a man in 
the womb of a Sudra woman. 

13. I establish this rule to-day on earth 
in respect of the consequences of one’s act 
that no sin will be committed in any act 
done by a man below the age of fourteen 
years. When committed only above that 
age, it will be sin.” 

Vaishampayana said 

14. Being cursed by that illustrious man 
for this fault, Dharma was born as Vidura 
in the womb of a Sudra woman. 

15. He (Vidura) was learned in Dharma 
and Artha ; he was free from avarice and 
anger ; he was fore-seeing, tranquil in mind, 
and ever engaged in doing good to the 
Kurus. 

thus ends the hundred and eighth Section , 
the history of Animandavya in the Sambhava parva.


Section 109

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. On the birth of these three sons 
(Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura), 
Kurujangala, Kurukshetra and the Kurus grew 
in prosperity. 

2. The land gave abundant harvests and 
the crops were juicy. The clouds showered 
rains at proper time, and the trees became 
full of fruits and flowers. 

3. The beasts of burdens were happy, 
and the deer and the birds were exceedingly 
glad. The flowers became fragrant 
and the fruits became sweet. 

4- The cities were filled with merchants 
and artizans; the people became brave, 
learned, honest and happy. 

5. There were no thieves, there was 
none who was sinful. It seemed that 
Satya Yuga had come over all parts of the 
kingdom. 

6. The people were devoted to virtuous 
acts, sacrifices, and the vow of the truth. 
Bearing love and affection for one another, 
they grew in prosperity. 

7. They were free from pride, anger 
and covetousness ; they took delight in 
sports which were perfectly innocent. 

8—9. The holy city (Hastinapur) like 
the wide ocean, full of hundreds of palaces 
and mansions, possessing gates and arches 
and looking like dark clouds, appeared like 
the celestial capital of Indra. The people 
sported in great delight in the rivers, lakes, 
tanks, beautiful groves and woods. 

10. The Southern Kurus, in virtous 
rivalry with the Northern Kurus, walked 
with the Devarshis and Charanas. 

11. None was there miserly, and there 
was no woman who was a widow in that 
delightful country whose prosperity was 
thus increased by the Kurus. 

12. The wells were full of water, the 
groves abounded with trees, the houses of 
Brahmanas were full of wealth, and the 
whole kingdom was full of prosperity. 

13. O king, thus virtuously ruled by 
Bhishma, the kingdom was adorned with 
hundreds of sacrificial stakes. 

14. The wheel of virtue being thus set 
in motion by Bhishma, the country was full 
of increased population, people coming from 
other countries. 

15. The citizens and the people 
were all filled with hope on seeing the 
achievements and behaviour of the youthful
princes. 

16. O king, in the house of the chief 
Kurus and in those of the people, "Give",
"Eat" were the words that were constantly 
heard. 

17. Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura 
were brought up from their birth by Bhishma, 
as if they were his own sons. 

18. They passed through the usual rites 
of their order ; they engaged themselves in 
study and vows ; they grew up into youths, 
expert in athletic sports and labour. 

19. They became expert in archery, 
learned in the Vedas, skillful in club-fight 
and in using sword and shield. They were 
experts in horse-manship and in the management
of elephants ; they were learned in the 
science of morality. 

20. They were acquainted with history, 
Puranas and with many other branches of 
learning. They were well-acquainted with 
the mystery of the Vedas and the Vedangas. 
The knowledge they acquired was versitile 
and deep. 

21. The greatly powerful Pandu excelled 
all men in the science of archery. The 
king Dhritarashtra excelled all men in personal
strength. 

Section evil. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Janamejaya said =— 

1. What did Dharma (the god of 
justice) for which he was cursed ? Who was 
the Brahmana Rishi, for whose curse the 
god had to be born in the womb of a Sudra 
woman ? 

Vaishampayana said 

2. There was a certain Brahmana, who 
was known as Mandavya. He was learned 
in all the precepts of virtue; he was devoted 
to truth and asceticism. 

3. The great ascetic sat at the entrance of 
his hermitage, as a great Yogee with his arms 
upraised in the observance of the vow of 
silence. 

4. As he passed years together (in that 
state), one day (some) robbers came to his 
hermitage with stolen properties. 

5-6. O best of the Bharata race, they 
were pursued by many guards-men. O 
best of the Kuru race, the thieves, entering 
that hermitage, hid their booty there. Before 
the force (guards-men) came up, they too 
hid themselves in fear. But as soon as they 
had concealed themselves, the guards in 
pursuit came to the spot. 

7. O king, the pursuers of the thieves saw 
the ascetic sitting in that state; and they 
asked him, 

8. “O excellent Brahmana, which way 
the thieves have gone? O Brahmana, point 
them to us, so that we may follow them without
loss of time.” 

9. O king, having been thus addressed 
by the guards, the ascetic did not say a 
word in reply,—good or bad. 

10. Thereupon, the officers of the king, in 
searching that hermitage, found the thieves 
with the stolen properties concealed there. 

11. The suspicion of the guards fell upon 
the Rishi; they seized him with the thieves 
and brought him before the king. 

12. The king sentenced him along with 
the thieves The guards, acting in ignorance, 
put that great Rishi also on the Sula 
(an instRuruent of death). 

13. Having put them (the thieves) and 
the Rishi on the Sula they returned to the 
king with the stolen property they had 
recovered. 

14. though the virtuous-minded Brahmana
Rishi remained for many years on the 
Sula without food, yet he did not die. 

15. The illustrious man, who was in deep 
Tapa at the point of the Sula, kept up his
life and brought other Rishis there by his 
ascetic power. 

16. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
they came in the night in the forms of birds ; 
and seeing him engaged in Tapa (ascetic 
meditation), though fixed on the Sula , they 
were extremely agrieved. 

17. Having shown themselves in their 
own forms, they asked that excellent Bramhmana, 
“O Brahmana, we desire to hear 
what is your sin for which you suffer this 
torture of being placed at the point of the 
Sula. 

thus ends the hundred and seventh 
chapter, the history of Animandavya, 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section CVIII. 

(SAMBHABA PARVA .)—

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Thereupon, that best of Rishis thus 
replied to the ascetics,  Whom shall I 
blame ? None is to blame. 

2. O king, the guards, having seen him 
after many days in that state, told the king 
all that had happened. 

3. Having heard their words, the king 
after consulting with his ministers, gratified 
that excellent Rishi fixed on the Sula . 

The king said 

4. O best of Rishis, I have offended 
you out of ignorance. I beseech you, pardon 
me. You should not be angry with me. 

Vaishampayana said 

5—6. Having been thus addressed by 
the king, the Rishi was gratified. Having 
thus gratified him, the king took down the 
Sula and tried to draw it out from him but 
he was unable to do it. 

7. The Rishi in that state with Sula 
practised the austerest penances, and he thus 
conquered by his asceticism many regions 
difficult to be obtained. 

8. therefore, he was called on earth 
Animandavya. That great truth-knowing 
Brahmana (one day) went to Dharma (the 
god of justice). 

9. Seeing the god seated on his scat, 
the lord (Rishi) asked him reproachingly, 
What is the sinful act which has been 
committed unconsciously by me 

10. For which 1 am suffering from this 
punishment? Tell me without delay, and 
then see my ascetic power.' 

Dharma said 

11. O ascetic, a little insect was once 
pierced by you with a blade of grass ; you 
now receive the fruit of your action. 

Animandavya said 

12. You have inflicted upon me a great 
punishment for a little fault. therefore 
O Dharma, you will be born as a man in 
the womb of a Sudra woman. 

13. I establish this rule to-day on earth 
in respect of the consequences of one’s act 
that no sin will be committed in any act 
done by a man below the age of fourteen 
years. When committed only above that 
age, it will be sin.” 

Vaishampayana said 

14. Being cursed by that illustrious man 
for this fault, Dharma was born as Vidura 
in the womb of a Sudra woman. 

15. He (Vidura) was learned in Dharma 
and Artha ; he was free from avarice and 
anger ; he was fore-seeing, tranquil in mind, 
and ever engaged in doing good to the 
Kurus. 

thus ends the hundred and eighth Section , 
the history of Animandavya , in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 109

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. On the birth of these three sons 
(Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura), Kuru- 
Jangala, Kurukshetra and the Kurus grew 
in prosperity. 

2. The land gave abundant harvests and 
the crops were juicy. The clouds showered 
rains at proper time, and the trees became 
full of fruits and flowers. 

3. The beasts of burdens were happy, 
and the deer and the birds were exceedingly
glad. The flowers became fragrant 
and the fruits became sweet. 

4. The cities were filled with merchants 
and artizans; the people became brave, 
learned, honest and happy. 

5. There were no thieves, there was 
none who was sinful. It seemed that 
Satya Yuga had come over all parts of the 
kingdom. 

6. The people were devoted to virtuous 
acts, sacrifices, and the vow of the truth. 
Bearing love and affection for one another, 
they grew in prosperity. 

7. They were free from pride, anger 
and covetousness ; they took delight in 
sports which were perfectly innocent. 

8—9. The holy city (Hastinapur) like 
the wide ocean, full of hundreds of palaces 
and mansions, possessing gates and arches 
and looking like dark clouds, appeared like 
the celestial capital of Indra. The people 
sported in great delight in the rivers, lakes, 
tanks, beautiful groves and woods. 

10. The Southern Kurus, in virtous 
rivalry with the Northern Kurus, walked 
with the Devarshis and Charanas. 

11. None was there miserly, and there 
was no woman who was a widow in that 
delightful country whose prosperity was 
thus increased by the Kurus. 

12. The wells were full of water, the 
groves abounded with trees, the houses of 
Brahmanas were full of wealth, and the 
whole kingdom was full of prosperity. 

13. O king, thus virtuously ruled by 
Bhishma, the kingdom was adorned with 
hundreds of sacrificial stakes. 

14. The wheel of virtue being thus set 
in motion by Bhishma, the country was full 
of increased population, people coming from 
other countries. 

15. The citizens and the people, 
were all filled with hope on seeing the 
achievements and behaviour of the youthful 
princes. 

16. O king, in the house of the chief 
Kurus and in those of the people, "Give"
"Eat" were the words that were constantly 
heard. 

17. Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura 
were brought up from their birth by Bhishma, 
as if they were his own sons. 

18. They passed through the usual rites 
of their order ; they engaged themselves in 
study and vows ; they grew up into youths, 
expert in athletic sports and labour. 

19. They became expert in archery, 
learned in the Vedas, skillful in club-fight 
and in using sword and shield. They were 
experts in horse-manship and in the management 
of elephants; they were learned in the 
science of morality. 

20. They were acquainted with history, 
Puranas and with many other branches of 
learning. They were well-acquainted with 
the mystery of the Vedas and the Vedangas. 
The knowledge they acquired was versitile 
and deep. 

21. The greatly powerful Pandu excelled 
all men in the science of archery. The 
king Dhritarashtra excelled all men in 
personal strength. 

22. O king, there was none in the three 
worlds, who excelled Vidura in his devotion 
towards religion and virtue, and in his 
knowledge of the science of morality. 

23. On seeing the restoration of the 
extinct dynasty of aantanu, the following saying 
became current over all countries. 

24. ‘Amongst the mothers of heroes, the 
daughter of the king of Kashi, among all 
countries, Kurujangal&s ; among all virtuous 
men, Bhishma; and among all cities, Hasti- 
napur, are the foremost. 

25. Dhritarashtra did not get the kingdom, 
because he was blind ; and Vidura also did 
not get it, because he was born of a Sudra 
woman, therefore Pandu became king. 

26. One day the foremost of all states¬ 
men, the learned m all the moral precepts, 
the son of Ganga (Bhishma), spoke to Vidura 
thus. 

thus ends the hundred and ninth chapter, 
the installation of Patidu, in the Sambhava 
of the Adi Parva, 


Section 110

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued, 

Bhishma said.:— 

1 This our famous dynasty, endued with 
every virtue and accomplishment, has all 
along ruled over all other kings on earth. 

2—3. It was perpetuated by many 
virtuous-minded and virtuously inclined kings. 
Satyavati, the illustrious Krishna  
Dwaipayana), and myself, have raised you up in 
order that this our great dynasty may not be 
extinct. 

4. It is certainly your duty and mine to 
take such steps as our this dynasty may  
expand as the sea. 

5. I have heard that the princess of the 
Yadavas, the daughter of Suvala and the 
princess of Madra, are worthy of being allied 
to our dynasty. 

6. O sons, all these maidens are the best 
of Kshatriyas ; they are beautiful and of pure 
birth ; they are eminently fit for alliance 
with our family. 

7. O foremost of intelligent men, Vidura, 
1 think we should chose them for the per¬ 
petuation of our race. Tell me what you 
think. 

Vidura said 

8. You are our father, you are our
mother, you are our great preceptor. You 
yourself do what you think proper for the 
welfare of this dynasty. 

Vaishampayana said 

9. He (Bhishma) heard from the Brahmanas 
that the daughter of Suvala, Gandhari, 
had received a boon by worshipping the 
destroyer of eyes of Vaga, the boon-giving 
diety Hara (Siva). 

10. The amiable Gandhari would get 
one hundred sons. Having heard this, the 
grandsire of the Kurus, Bhishma 

11. Sent messengers to the king of 
Gandhara. O descendant of the Bharata 
race, (king) Suvala hesitated on account of 
the blindness (of the bridegroom.) 

12. But taking into consideration the 
noble blood, the fame and the conduct of the 
Kurus, he bestowed the virtuous Gandhari 
on Dhritarashtra. 

13. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
having heard of the blindness of Dhritarashtra, 
and that her parents had consented to 
bestow her (Gandhari) upon him, 

14—15. O king, ever-devoted to her hus¬ 
band, (Gandhari) bandaged her own eyes 
with cloth, gathered into many folds, out of 
her desire that she would not be wanting in 
respect and love for her husband. Thereupon 
the son of the king of Gandhari, 
Shakuni, 

16. Bringing his beautiful and young 
and well-behaved sister to the Kurus, 
formally gave her to Dhritarashtra. 

17. The nuptials were solemnised with 
the permission of Bhishma. The hero 
(Shakuni), giving away his sister with (many 
valuable) robes, returned to his own capital, 
after being duly worshipped by Bhishma. 

18. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
the beautiful Gandhari pleased all the 
Kurus by her behaviour and respectful 
attentions. 

19. She, ever-devoted to her husband 
pleased her superiors by her good conduct, 
and vow-observing as she was, she never 
referred to other men even in words. 

thus ends the hundred and tenth Section of 
the marriage of Dhritarashtra in the 
Sambhava of the Adiparva . 


Section 111

(SHAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued 

Vaishampayana said 

1. There was a chief among the Yadus, 
named Sura, who was the father of Vasudeva.
His daughter was named Pritha  
she was matchless in beauty on earth. 

2 —3. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
that truthful man (Sura) gave his first 
born child to the son of his paternal aunt,— 
his childless cousin and favour-seeking 
friend,—the high-souled Kuntibhoja, according
to a promise given before 

4—5. She (Pritha) Was appointed in her 
(adoptive) father’s house to look after the 
hospitality to the Brahmanas and guests. 
One day by careful attentions she gratified 
the terrible Brahmana of rigid vows, known 
by the name of Durvasa, learned in the 
mystery of religion 

6. Anticipating the future difficulty of 
her getting sons, he (Durvasa) taught her a 
Mantra for invoking any of the celestials 
(she liked for growing her children). The 
Rishi then said to her, 

7. “Through the effulgence of those 
celestials whom you will invoke by this 
Mantra , offspring will be certainly begotten 
on you." 

8. Having been thus told by the Brahmana
(Durvasa) the illustrious Kunti 
(Pritha), being curious, invoked in her 
maidenhood the god Arka (Sun). 

9. She immediately saw (before her) that 
effulgent deity (Sun), that beholder of everything
in the world. Seeing the wonderful 
sight, that maiden of faultless feature was 
Very much surprised. 

10. The deity Vivaswata (Sun), coming to 
her said, “O black-eyed lady,—here I am. 
Tell me what I can do for you.” 

Kunti laid 

11. O slayer of foes, a certain Brah¬ 
mana gave me this science (Mantra). O 
Lord, I have invoked you, only to see the 
efficacy of the Mantra . 

12. For my this fault, I bow down my 
head to you to ask for your grace. A 
woman, however guilty, deserves protection.

The Sun said 

13. I know Durvasa has given you this 
boon. Cast off your fears and allow me 
your embrace 

14. O amiable girl, my approach is
infallible ; it must be fruitful. O timid maiden, 
if my coming be for nothing, it will be 
certainty a transgression of yours.” 

Vaishampay&na said 

15. Vivaswata thus spoke to her many 
things to allay her fears. O descendant of 
the Bharata race, the illustrious and beautiful 
girl, as she was a maid, 

16. Did not consent to grant his request 
from modesty and from the fear of her 
relatives. O best of the Bharata race, 
Arka again addressed her thus, 

17. “O princess, there will be no sin in 
gratifying me.” Having said this to the 
daughter of Kuntihoja, that illustrious 
deity, 

18—19. That-illuminator of the universe, 
Tapana (Sun) received her embraces. 
Thereupon was born a hero, known all 
over the world by the name of Karna, the 
foremost of all wielders of arms, encased 
in a natural armour, blessed with good 
fortune and endued with celestial beauty 
and all auspicious marks, and with a face 
brightened by ear-rings. 

20. The greatly effulgent Tapana, then 
giving Pritha her maiden-hood, again went 
to heaven. 

21. The princess of the Vrisni race 
(Pritha) became atfiicted with sorrow to see 
the birth of the child. She intently  
reflected on the course she should adopt. 

22. She resolved to conceal her frailty 
from the fear of her friends and relatives. 
Kunti threw her that powerful son into 
water. 

23. The illustrious husband of Radha 
took up that child thrown into the water. 
That son of Suta, (the husband of Radha), 
with his wife brought him up as their son 

24. They gave that son the name of 
Vasushena because he was born with wealth, 

(a natural armour and ear-rings). 

25. He grew up very strong and 
became expert in all weapons. Possessed of 
great energy, he worshipped the Sun until 
is back was scorched by its rays. 

26. When he was thus engaged in his 
worship, there was nothing on earth that 
the heroic and intelligent Vasushena would 
not give to Brahmanas. 

27. Indra, assuming the form of a Brahmana 
came to him for aim. Ever engaged 
to do good to Arjuna, he asked for the 
armour. 

28. Taking off the natural armour from 
his body, Karna with joined hands gave it to 
Indra in the form of a Brahmana. 

29. The king of the celestials received 
the gift, and he was exceedingly pleased with 
his liberality. The lord of the celestials 
gave him a weapon, saying, 

30. "Among the celestials, the Asuras, 
the Gandharvas, the Nagas and the Rakshasas
whoever you will desire to conquer, 
he will certainly be killed by this weapon. 

31. The son of Surya was known by the 
name of Vasushena, but after his cutting off 
his natural armour, he was called Karna 
(cutter). 

thus ends the hundred and eleventh 
Section , the acquirement of Indra's weapon , 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva 


Section 112

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. The daughter of Kuntibhoja, Pritba, 
had large eyes; she was endued with 
beauty and every accomplishment; she was 
of rigid vows, devoted to virtue; and she 
possesed every good quality. 

2. But though the maiden was effulgent 
and possessed beauty and all womanly 
qualifications and youth, yet no king sought 
for her hand. 

3. O best of kings, threupon, the king 
Kuntibhoja invited all the monarchs, and 
offered her in a Swayamvara. 

4. The intelligent Kunti saw that best 
of kings, the foremost of the Bharata race, 
Pandu, in the assembly of the kings. 

 5. Proud as the lion, broad-chested, 
bull-eyed, greatly strong, like sun 
outshining all the kings in splendour, 

 6. He (Pandu) looked among the kings 
as the second Indra. In the assembly that 
best of men, Pandu, having seen the maiden 
of faultless feature, the amiable daughter of 
Kuntibhoja, became very much agitated in 
mind. 

7. Kunti advanced in modesty, quivering 
with emotion and placed the nuptial garland 
round the neck of the king (Pandu). 

8. Finding that Kunti had chosen Pandu, 
the other kings returned to their kingdoms 
on elephants, on horses and cars on which 
they had come. 

9. O king, her father then performed 
the nuptial rites in dm form. The  
descendant of Kuru (Pandu) and the daughter 
of Kuntibhoja (Kunti), 

10. Blessed with great and good fortune, 
formed a couple like Indra and Sachi. O 
king, Kuntibhoja, after the marriage of 
Kunti, 

if. Presented the bridegroom with 
much wealth. O best of the Kuru race, the 
king (Kuntibhoja) then sent him (Pandu) 
to his own capital.

12. Accompanied by a large force, 
bearing various kinds of banners and penons, 
and eulogised and blessed by many
Brahmanas and great Rishis, 

13. The descendant of Kuru, king 
Pandu, reached his own capital, and that 
lord (Pandu) established his wife Kunti 
there. 

thus ends the hundred and twelvtih 
Section , the marriage of Kunti, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 113

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Some time after, the son of Shantanu, 
the intelligent Bhishma, thought of marrying 
Pandu to a second wife. 

2. Accompained by the aged ministers, 
Brahmanas and great Rishis, and with a 
force of the four kinds he went to the capital 
of the king of Madra. 

3. That best of Valhikas(the king of 
Madra), having heard of his coming, went 
out to receive him with all honour; and that 
kitig (Bhishma) also entered bis capital. 

4. The king of Madra, having given him 
a white seat, water for washing his feet and 
Arghya asked the reason of his coming. 

5. The supporter of the Kurus' honour, 
Bhishma replied to the king of Madra, O
chastiser of foes, know that I have come for 
a maiden. 

6. We have heard that you have an 
illustrious and chaste sister, named Madri. 
I chose that illustrious maiden for Pandu. 

7. O king, you are in every way worthy 
of alliance with us. We also are worthy of 
you. O king of Madra, considering all this, 
accept us in the proper from.” 

8. Having been thus addressed by 
Bhishma, the King of Madra replied, "To 
my mind there is no other better bridegroom 
than one of your family. 

9. But there is a custom in our family 
ever observed by all the best of our kings 
Be it good or bad, 1 can not transgress it. 

10. It (this custom) is well known, and 
there is no doubt that it is also known to 
you. O excellent man, therefore, it is not 
proper for you to say "Bestow your sister"

11. O hero, it is our family custom to 
receive tribute. therefore, I cannot give 
you any assurance in the matter of your 
request.” 

12. The king Bhishma thus replied to the 
king of Madra, "O king, this is a great 
virtue ; the self-created (Brahma) has 
himself said it. 

13. Your ancestors have observed this 
custom. There is no fault to be found with it. 
O Shalya, it is well known that this custom 
has the approbation of the wise.'  

14—15. Having said this, that greatly 
effulgent son of Ganga (Bhishma) gave 
Shalya much gold, both coined and uncoined, 
precious stones of various colors, elephants, 
horses and cars, much cloth and many 
ornaments, many gems, pearls and corals. 

16. Shalya received all these wealths 
in delightful heart, and gave away his sister, 
decked with ornaments, to that lion of the 
Kuru race. 

17. The son of ocean-going Ganga, 
ntelligent Bhishma, taking Madri with him, 
Returned to the capital, named after the 
elephant (Hastinapur). 

18. The king Pandu, on an auspicious 
day and at the time indicated by the wise 
accepted the hands of Madri in due form. 

19. After the completion of the marriage, 
that king, the descendant of the Kuru race, 
established hi9 beautiful wife in handsome 
mansions. 

20. O king of kings, that best of kings 
(Pandu) then give himself up to enjoyments 
with his two wives, Kunti and Madri, at 
will and at pleasure. 

21. O king, when thirty days had 
passed away that Kuru king, the lord 
Pandu, started from his capital to conquer 
the world. 

22—24. After saluting and bowing to 
Bhishma and other eiders and bidding 
adieu to Dhritarashtra and other best of the 
Kurus, receiving their permission and 
performing all auspicious rites the king (Pandu) 
set out on his great campaign blessed by 
all around ana accompained by a great 
army of elephants, horses and cars. That 
celestial-like king was desirous of 
conquering the whole earth. 

25. Pandu marched against the enemies 
with such strong forces (as narrated above). 
Going to the east, that best of men, that 
spreader of Kuru fame, Pandu, defeated 
tne Dasarnas . 

26. Pandu then with his army of 
innumerable elephants, cavalry, infantry, and 
charioteers, and various coloured banners 

27. Marched against Dhirga, the king of 
Maghada, who being proud of his strength, 
had offended many kings. Attacking him 
in his capital, Rajgriha, he killed him. 

8. Taking possession of his treasury 
and many beasts of burden Pandu, went to 
Miihila and conquered the Videha in battle. 

29. O best of men, he then conquered 
Kashi, Sumbha and Pandra ; and by the 
strength of his arms and prowess he spread 
the fame of the Kurus. 

30. The kings were burnt by the  
far-reaching flames,—represented by his arrows 
and the splendour of his weapons,—of the 
great fire represented by that chastiser of 
foes, Pandu. 

31. Pandu defeated with his army the 
kings with their forces ; he kept them 
engaged in the works of the Kurus, 

32. Having been thus defeated by him, 
all the kings of the world recognised him as 
the only hero on earth as Indra is among the 
celestials. 

33 All the kings of the world bowed to 
him with joined hands and they waited upon 
him with presents of various kinds of gems 
and wealth, 

34. Precious stones, pearls, corals, much 
gold and silver, the jewels of cows and 
orses, elephants and cars, 

35. Asses, camels, buffaloes, goats and 
sheep, blankets and beautiful birds, and 
carpets made of theskm of Ranku. Having 
taken them all, the king of Hastinapur, 

36. Pandu, returned to his own capital 
Hastinapur to the great delight of all his 
subjects and citizens. 

37.  O the lion of kings, the fame of 
Shantanu and that of Bharata, was about to, 
be extinct, but it was now revived by 
Pandu. 

38. They, who robbed the Kurus before 
of both territory and wealth, were now forced 
by Pandu, the lion of Hastinapur, to pay : 
tributes." 

39. thus said in joyful hoart the kings 
with their ministers and with the citizens and 
people. 

40—42. All the Kurus with Bhishma at 
their head went out to receive him when he 
neared Hastinapur. They saw in delight 
the attendants of the king (Pandu), laden : 
with much wealth ; the train of various con- 
veyances, of elephants, horses, cars, kine, 
camels, and other animals laden with all 
kinds of wealth was so long that they could 
not find its end. 

43. Then the sweller of Kausalya's joy, 
(Pandu), worshipped the feet of his father 
(uncle) Bhishma and then saluted the, 
citizens and others as each deserved. 

44. Bhishma also shed tears of joy and  
embraced his son who had returned 
victorious after subjugating many kingdoms of' 
others. 

45. And he (Pandu), instilling joy into 
the hearts of his people, eatered Hastinapur 
in a flourish of hundreds of tRurupets and 
bugles. 

thus ends the hundred and the thirteenth 
chapter, the conquest of Pandu, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 114

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. He (Pandu), at the command of 
Dhritarashtra, offered the wealth acquired 
by the prowess of his arms to Bhishma, to 
Satyavati and to their mother (Kausalya). 

2. Pandu sent a portion of the wealth to 
Vidura. The virtuous-minded man (Pandu) 
gratified his friend and relatives with (the 
j|£eftents of) wealth. 

3. The descendant of Bharata, (Pan hi) 
gratified Satyavati, Bhishma and the 
illustrious and amiable princesses of Kosala with 
the wealth, acquired by his prowess of arms; 

4. Kausalya, in embracing her son of 
matchless prowess became as glad as Sachi 
on embracing Jayanta (her son.) 

5. Dhritarashtra performed with the 
wealth acquired by that hero five great 
sacrifices, in which offerings were made to 
the Brahmanas by hundreds and thousands, 
and in which so much wealth was spent as 
would have been sufficient for one hundred 
Horse-sacrifices. 

6. O best of the Bharata race, some time 
after, Pandu, who had mastered over his 
senses, retired into a forest with (his wives) 
Kunti and Madri. 

7. He left his excellent palace and its 
luxurious bed. He lived always in the 
forest, being ever engaged in hunting. 

8. He lived in a delightful and hilly 
region over grown with huge Sala trees 
on the southern slope of the Himalayas 
where he roamed freely. 

9. The handsome Pandu roamed in the 
forest with Kunti and Madri like Airavata 
with two female elephants. 

10. The dwellers of (that) forest 
regarded the heroic Bharata prince with his 
two wives,— (Pandu), armed with swords 
arrows and bows and encased in beautiful 
armour, as a god wandering amongst them. 
The people were busy in supplying every 
object of pleasure and enjoyment to him in 
his retirement at the command of Dhritarashtra.

12. The son of the river (Bhistna) heard 
that king Devaka had a daughter, young 
and beautiful, born in a Sudra wife. 

13. The best of the Barata race (Bhishma) 
brought her from her father's abode and he 
married her to the high-minded Vidura. 

14. The descendant of Kuru, Vidura, 
begot on her children as genteel and  
accomplished as he himself was. 

thus ends the hundred and the fourteenth
chapter, the marrirge of Vidura 
in the Sambhava of the Add Parva . 

Section 115

(SAMBHAVA PARVA.)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O Janamejaya, one hundred sons of 
Dhritarashtra were born in the womb of 
Gandhari. Besides these one hundred sons, 
one more was born by a Vaisya wife. 

2. Pandu had by (his wives) Kunti and 
Madri five sons,—all great car-warriors,— 
who were all begotten by celestials for the 
perpetuation of the (Kuru) dynasty, 

Janamejaya said 

3. O best of the twice-born, why did 
Gandhari give birth to one hundred sons ? 
In how many years (they were born) ? What 
was their period of life ? 

4. How did Dhritarashtra beget a son on 
a Vaisya wife ? How did Dhritarashtra behave 
towards his loving, obedient and virtuous 
wife, Gandhari ? 

5. How were born the five sons of Pandu, 
those great car-warriors, though cursed by 
the nigh-souled man (the Rishi in the form 
of deer) ? 

6. O ascetic, tell me all this in detail. 
I am not satiated with hearing the accounts 
of my friends and relatives. 

Vaishampayana said 

7. One day Gandhari gratified 
Dwaipayana who came hungry and fatigued. 
Vyasa granted her a boon, 

g. (Namely) that she should have one 
hundred sons like her husband. Some time 
after she conceived by Dhritarashtra. 

9. She bore the burden in her womb for 
two years without being delivered; she 
was, therefore, much afflicted with grief. 

10—11. She heard that a son was born 
to Kunti, as effulgent as the morning sun. 
Being sorry -that in her case the time of 
bearing the child in the womb was loo long, 
and being deprived of reason by grief, she 
struck her womb with violence without the 
knowledgeof Dhritarashtra, 

12. Thereupon was brought forth a hard 
mass of flesh like an iron ball which she bore 
in her womb for two years. 

13. Dwaipayana, learning it, soon came to 
her, and that best of ascetics (Vyasa) saw 
that mass of flesh. 

14. He said to the daughter of Suvala, 
What have you done?” And she  
(Gandhari) told her real feeling to the great 
Rishi. 

Gandhari said:— 

15. Having heard that Kunti had first 
given birth to a son, as effulgent as the sun, 
struck at my womb in grief. 

16. You granted me the boon that I 
should get one hundred sons. But a ball of 
flesh has come out in the place of one 
hundred sons. 

Vyasa said 

17. O daughter of Suvala, it is even 
so. My words can never be futile. I have 
not spoken an untruth even in jest, why then 
will my words be futile! 

18. Let one hundred jars, filled with 
Ghee , be brought in the proper way; let them 
be placed at a concealed place, and let cool 
water be sprinkled on this ball of flesh. 

Vaishampayana said 

19. The ball of flesh, being thus sprinkled
with water, became divided into many parts. 
They separately became different parts, each 
about the size of the thumb. 

20. O king, that ball of flesh in time 
became gradually one hundred and one 
separate parts. 

21. These were then placed into the jars 
filled with Ghee, and they were placed at a 
concealed spot and were carefully watched. 

22. The illustrious (Vyasa) then said to 
the daughter of Suvala that she should open 
the covers of the jars after full two years. 

23. Having said this, and having made 
these arrangements, the illustrious and wise 
Vyasa went to the Himalayas mountains to 
perform his penances. 

24. King Duryodhana was then in time 
born from them (the parts of the fleshy 
ball), According to the order of birth, 
Yudhishthira was the eldest. 

25. The news of Duryodhana’s birth was 
carried to Bhishma and the wise Vidura. On 
the day when haughty Duryodhana was born, 
on that very day was born mighty-armed 
and greatly powerful Bhima. 

26. O king, as soon as that son of Dhritarastra 
(Duryodhana) was born, he roared 
and brayed like an ass. 

27. Hearing that sound, the arsons 
vultures jackals and crpws spontaneously 
cried ; strong wind began to blow, and fires 
raged in every direction. 

28—29. Thereupon, O king, the frightened
king Dhritarashtra, summoning many 
Brahmanas, Bhishma, Vidura ana other 
friends, relatives and Kurus, said,  The 
eldest of the princes, Yudhishthira is the  
perpetuator of your race. He bas acquired the 
kingdom by virtue of his birth. We have 
nothing to say to this. 

30. But will my son be able to become 
king after him ? Tell me what is right 
and lawful. 

31. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
jackals and other carnivorous animals began 
to howl ominously from all sides. 

32. O king, seeing these frightful 
ominous signs, the assembled Brahmanas and 
the high-minded Vidura said, 

33. “O king, O best of men, when these 
fearful ominous signs are seen at the birth of
your eldest son, 

34. It is evident he will be exterminator 
of your race. The prosperity of the race 
depends upon his abandonement. There 
must be great calamity in keeping him. 

35. O king, if you abandon him, there 
still remain ninety-nine sons of yours. O 
descendant of the Bharata race, if you desire 
the good of your dynasty, abandon him. 
Do goad to the world and to your own race 
by abandoning him. 

36. It is said that an individual should 
be abandoned for the sake of the family ; a 
family should be abandoned for the sake of a 
village ; a village should be abandoned for 
the soke of a city, and the world should be 
abandoned for the sake of the soul.” 

37. Having been thus addressed by 
Vidura and the Brahmanas, the king, 
out of affection (for the son) did not act 
accordingly. 

38. O king, there were born within a 
month one hundered sons of Dhritarashtra 
and also a daughter above and over that 
one hundred. 

39. When Gandhari was afflicted with 
her advanced pregnancy, a Vaisya maid
servant was engaged to attend upon ' 
Dhritarashtra. 

40. O king, during that year, was 
begotten on her by Dhritarashtra an illustrious 
and greatly intelligent Son, who was 
afterwards named Yuyutsu, alio called 
Karana. 

41. thus were begotten by the wise 
Dhritarashtra one hundred sons, who were 
all heroes, and (thus also was born) greatly 
powerful Yuyutsu born of a Vaisya 
woman. 

thus ends the hundred and fifteenth 
Section , the birth of Gandhari's sons , in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 116

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Janamejaya said 

1. You have told me from the beginning 
all about the birth of Dhritarashtra’s one 
hundred sons, the result of the boon granted 
by the Rishi, but you have not told me (the 
particulars of the birth) of the daughter. 

2. O sinless one, you have said that over 
and above one hnndred sons, there was 
another son, named Yuyutsu, born of a Vaisya 
woman, and also a daughter by Gandhari. 
“ The daughter of the king of Gandhar 
would get one hundred sons. 

3. O illustrious man, so said the 
great Rishi Vyasa of immeasurable effulgence 
How do you then tell me that a 
daughter was born (over and above the 
hundred) ? 

4. The ball of flesh was divided by 
the great Rishi into only one hundred parts, 
and the daughter of Suvala (Gandhan) did 
not conceive at any other time, 

5. How then was born Dushala ? O 
Brahmana Rishi, tell me this ; my curiosity 
is very great. 

Vaishampayana said 

6—7. O descendant of Pandu, your 
question is just. I shall tell you how it 
happened. The great ascetic, the illustrious 
Rishi himself, sprinkled that ball of flesh with 
cool water and began to divide it into parts. 
O king, as it was being divided into parts, 
the nurse began to take them up ana put 
them one by one into the jars filled with 
Ghee. 

8. In the meanwhile the beautiful and 
chaste Gandhari of rigid vows, feeling the 
affection for a daughter, 

9. Reflected in her mind, " There is no 
doubt that I shall have one hundred sons. 
The Rishi had said this, and it cannot be 
otherwise. 

10. If a daughter is born to me oyer 
and above my one hundred sons, I shall 
be exceedingly happy. 

11. My husband may then go to those 
worlds that the possession of a daughter's 
sons confers on a man. Every woman 
feels a very great affection for her son-in-law. 

12. If, therefore, I get a daughter over 
and above my one hundred sons, then 
surrounded by sons and daughter's sons, 
I shall feel myself supremely happy. 

13. If I have truly performed penances, 
if I have ever given in charity, if I have 
ever performed Homa, if ever I have 
respected my superiors, let a daughter be born 
to me.” 

14. At this time that best of Rishis, the 
illustrious Krishna Dwaipayana himself, 
was dividing that ball of flesh. Counting 
full one hundred parts, he said to the 
daughter of Suvala (Gandhari), 

15. “Here are your one hundred sons. 
I did not speak to you anything that was 
not true. Here is a part over and above 
one hundred which will give you a daughter's 
son. 

16. From this will be born an amiable 
and fortunate daughter, as you have 
desired." Then that great ascetic, bringing 
another jar filled with Ghee, placed the part 
into it. 

17. For the purpose of a daughter, O 
descendant of tne Bharata race, thus have I 
narrated to you all about the birth of 
Dushala. O sinless one, tell me what more 
am I to narrate. 

thus ends the hundred and sixteenth 
chapter, the birth of Dushala, in the Sam¬ 
bhava of the Adi Parva. 


Section 117

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Janamejaya Said:— 

I. O Lord, tell me the names of all the 
sons of Dhritarashtra, biginning from the 
eldest. According to the order of their 
births. 

Vaishampayana said 

2 —15. (They are) Duryodhana, Yujntsa 
Dushashana, Dussaha, Dushala, Durmukha 
Vivingsati, Vikarna, Jalasandha, Sulochana 
Vinda, Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Suvahti, 
Dhuspradharshana, Durmashena, Durmukha, 
Dushkarma, Kama, Chitra, Upachitra 
Chitraksha, Charu, Chitrangoda, Durmada,
Dushpraharsha, Vivitsu, Vikata, 
Sama, Umanava, Padmanava, Nanda, 
Upanandaka, Senapati, Shusena, Kundo- 
dara, Mandara, Chitravahu, Chitravarmana, 
Suvarmana, Durvilashana, Ayavahu," 
Mahavahu Chitrachapa, Sukundala, Vaimavega 
 Bhimavala, Valakt, Valavarhdana 
Ugrayudha, Bhimashara, Kanakava, 
Dredhyudha, Dhridavarmana, Dredha, Khatra, 
Somakriti, Anadara, Jarasandha, Dridha- 
sandha, Satyasandha, Sahasravaka, Ugra- 
srava, Ugrasena, Kshemamurti, Aparajita, 
Panditaka, Vishalaksha, Durudhara, Dri- 
dhahasta, Subasta, Vatagiva, Suvarchasta, 
Adityoketu, Vahvasen, Nagadatta, Auny- 
aina, Nishangi, Kavachi, Dandi, Danda- 
dhar, Dhaungraha, Ugra, Bhimaratha, 
Vira, Virabahu, Alolupa, Abhoya, Rudra, 
Karma, Dhridaratha, Anadhershya, Kun- 
davida, Viravi, Dhirgolochana, Dirguvahu, 
Mahavahu, Vyndhoru, Kanakardoya, Kendoja
and Chitrakha. He (Dhritarashtra, 
had also a daughter, named Dushala, 
above and over these one hundred sons.) 

16. They were all heroes and Atirathas, 
they were all learned in the science of war. 
They were all well acquainted with the 
Vedas and experts in using all kinds of 
weapons. 

17. O king worthy wives were selected 
for them at the proper time and after due 
examinations by king Dhritarashtra. 

18. O best of the Bharata race, king 
Dhritarashtra bestowed Dushala at the proper
time and with due rites on Jayadratha. 

thus ends the hundred and seventeenth 
Section , the narrating of the names of 
Dhritarashtra's sons , in the Sambhava of 
the Adi Parva. 


Section 118

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Janamejaya said 

1. O utterer of Brahma, you have recited 
the excellent account of the extraordinary 
births of the sons of Dhritarashtra on earth, 
the result of the Rishi's grace. 

2. O Brahmana, you have also told me 
their names according to their order of birth. 
I have heard all this from you. (Now) tell 
me all about the Pandavas. 

3. While reciting the incarnations of 
the celestials, the A suras and being? of other 
classes on earth, you said that the illustrious 
men, the Pandavas, as powerful as the 
Icing of the celestials, were all incarnate 
portions of the celestials themselves. 

4. I desire to hear all about those beings 
of extraordinary achievements, beginning 
from the moments of their births. O Vaishampayana, narrate to me all their achievements.

Vaishampayana said 

5. O king, one day Pandu, while roaming
in that great forest abounding in deer 
and other fierce animals, saw a large deer, 
the leader of its herd, coupling with its 
mate. 

6. Seeing them, Pandu pierced both 
with five of his sharp and swift arrows, 
winged with golden feathers. 

7. O king, it was a greatly effulgent 
ascetic, the son of a Rishi (in the form 
of that deer) ; this effulgent man was with 
his wife who was a deer. 

8. Wounded by Pandu while with the 
mate, he feJl down on the ground in a 
moment and uttered cries that were human 
He began to weep bitterly. 

The deer said 

9. Even men, who are slaves of lust and 
anger, who are devoid of reason and who 
are ever sinful, never commit such a cruel act. 

10. Man’s individual judgment does not 
prevail against the ordinance , the ordinance 
(always) prevails against individual judgment.
The wise men never sanction anything 
discountenanced by the ordinance. 

11. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
you are born in a dynasty that has ever been 
virtuous. How is it that you have lost your 
reason, over-powered by passions ?

Pandu said 

12. O deer, kings behave in the matter 
of killing the animals of your species (deer) 
as they do in the matter of killing their foes. 
therefore, you should not, reprove me out of 
ignorance. 

13. Animals of your species are killed by 
open or covert means. This is the practice 
of kings. Then why do you reprove me ? 

14-15. The Rishi Agasta, while engaged 
in a (great) sacrifice, hunted he deer in the 
great forest and offered every one of them 
to the celestials. Agasta performed the 
Noma with the fat of the deer. You have 
been killed according to such precedents. 
Why then do you reprove me ? 

The deer said 

16. Men do not throw their arrows even 
at their enimies when they are unprepared. 
There is a time for doing it; to kill 
at such a time is not censurable. 

Pandu said 

17. It is well-known that men kill deer 
by various means, without (the least) regard 
whether they are prepared or unprepared ; 
O deer, you should not, therefore, reprove 
me. 

The deer said:— 

18. O king, I do not blame you, because 
you have killed a deer, or because you 
ave done me an injury. Instead of doing 
such a cruel act, you should have waited 
till the completion of my intercourse. 

19. The intercourse is agreeable to all 
creatures; it is productive of good to all. 
What man of learning is there who 
kills a deer engaged in intercourse in the 
forest ? 

20. O king, I was joyfully engaged in 
intercourse with this mate to beget offspring. 
You have made my that effort futile. 

71. O great king, being born in the 
Puru dynasty, ever famous for its pure acts, 
and being a descendant of the Kuru race, 
you should not have committed such an act. 

22. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
this act of yours is extremely cruel, it deserves 
universal excretion, it is infamous and sinful 
and will certainly lead (you) to hell. 

23. You are well-acquanited with the 
pleasure of intercourse, you are also learned 
in the Sastras and the precepts of religion. 
You are like a celestial, you should not 
have committed such an act, unworthy of 
heaven. 

24. O best of kings, your duty is to 
chastise those who act cruelly, who are 
engaged in sinful practices and who are 
devoid of the precepts of religion (Dharma, 
Artha and Kama.) 

25. O best of men, O king, what have I 
done that you have killed me ?—I, am a Rishi 
who lives on fruits and roots though in the 
form of a deer ! 

26. I live in the forest always being 
disposed to peace. As you have killed me, I 
shall certainly curse you, 

27. Cruel as you have been to a couple, 
death shall certainly overtake you as soon 
as you will feel the influence of desire. 

28. I am an ascetic Rishi, named Kindama
I was engaged in intercourse with 
this deer out of shame of men. 

29. Assuming the form of a deer I roam 
in the deep forest in company with other 
female deer. The sin of killing a Brahmana, 
(however) will not be yours, for you have 
done it not knowing me (to be a Brahmana) 

30. As you have killed me in the form of 
a deer when I was full of desire, so you, O 
foolish man, will certainly meet with the fate 
that has befallen me. 

31. When you will go to your dear one, 
futl of desire as was the case with me, you 
win, at that time, certainly go to the land 
of the dead. 

32. Your wife, with whom you will join
at your last moments will also go with you 
with reverence and affection to the ever  
unavoidable land of the dead. 

33. As I have been plunged into grief 
when I was happy, so you will also be afflicted 
with grief wnen in happiness. 

Vaishampayana said -

34. Having said this, the deer, afflicted 
with grief, gave up his life; and Pandu also 
was plunged in grief in a moment. 

thus ends the hundred and eighteenth 
Section , the curse of the deer on Pandu, in 
the Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 


Section 119

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued 

Vaishampayana said 

1. After the death of the deer, the king 
(Pandu) like a friend (of his) wept bitterly 
with his wives, being much afflicted with 
grief. 

Pandusaid 

2. The wicked men, though born 
invirtuous families, being illuded with passions, 
become overwhelmed with misery as the 
fruit of their own acts. 

3. I have heard that my father, though 
begotten by a virtuous man, died when he 
was still a youth, only because he became a 
slave of lust. 

4. In the field of that lustful king, I was 
begotten by Krishna Dwaipayana of truthful
speech who was like Brahma himself. 

5. (Being the son of such a man) with 
my heart devoted to sin I lend wandering 
life in pursuit of deer. The gods have 
all forsaken me. 

6. I shall now seek for salvation; my 
heart is a great slave of passion. The great 
impediments to salvation is the desire 
to beget children. I shall now adopt 
Brahmacharya , following the example of my 
father. 

7. I shall certainly bring my passions 
under complete control by severe asceticism 
Forsaking my wives and other relatives, and 
shaving my head, I shall alone wander over 
the earth, begging my food from the loads of 
the forests (trees)

8. Forsaking every object of affection 
and aversion, and covering my body with 
dust, I that make the shelter of trees and 
deserted houses my home. 

9. I shall never yield to the influence of 
sorrow or joy; I shall regard praise and 
blame in the same light; I shall not seek 
benedictions or bows. I shall be in peace 
with all; I shall not accept gifts. 

10. I shall not mock any one; I shall not 
contract my brow at any body; I shall be 
ever cheerful ; and I shall be devoted to the 
good of all creatures. 

11. I shall not harm any of the four 
orders of creation, either mobile or immobile. 
I shall treat them all equally, as if they are 
my own children. 

12. I shall daily beg my food from 
only five or ten families. If it is impossible 
to get food thus, I shall remain fasting. 
I shall rather go with little food than to 
ask a man twice. 

13. If I do not obtain Yood after 
completing my round of seven or ten houses, I 
shall not enlarge my round out of covetousness. 
Whether I obtain or fail to obtain 
alms, I shall remain a great ascetic equally 
unmoved. 

14. The cutting off my one arm with an 
axe and the smearing of the other with 
sandal ,—both will be equally regarded by 
me as the same. I shall not desire good 
from one or evil from the other. 

15. I shall not be pleased with life or 
displeased with death. I shall neither wish 
to live or fear to die. 

16—18. Washing my heart of all sins, 
1 shall certainly transcend those sacred 
rites productive of happiness that men 
perform at inauspicious moments. I shall also 
abstain from all acts of Dharma, and Artha , 
and from all those acts those that lead to the 
gratification of senses. Being freed from all 
sins and snares of the world, I shall be as 
free as the wind. 

19. Acting always in this way and 
treading in the path of fearlessness, I shall at 
last lay down my life. 

20. I am destitute of the power of 
begetting children. I shall not certainly  
debate from the line of duty, in order to tread 
in the vile path of the world which is full of 
misery. 

21. Whether respected or disrespected 
by the world, that man, who, being desireless 
becomes full of desire, behaves like a 
dog. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

22. The king, having said this in sorrow, 
sighed; and looking at (his wives) Kunti and 
Madri said, 

Pandu said 

23—24. After gratifying all, tell the 
princesses of Koshala, Vidura, the king 
with all his friends, mother Satyavati, 
Bhishma, the royal priests, the high-souled. 
Soma drinking Brahmans of rigid vows and 
those old men who live under our protection 
that Pandu has retired into a forest. 

Vaishampayana said 

25 Having heard these words of their 
husband who had fixed his mind to retire 
into a forest, both Kunti and Madri 
addressed him in these proper words, 

26. “ O best of the Bharata race, there 
are many other Asramas (modes of life) in 
which you can perform with us, your 
lawfully wedded wives, great asceticism. 

27. In which you can obtain the salvation 
of your body, you may obtain heaven as 
your reward. As the great fruit (of your 
action) you can certainly become the lord 
of heaven. 

28. We shall also perform great asceticism 
with our husband, controlling our 
passions and abandoning all desires and 
pleasures. 

29. O greatly learned man, if you abandon 
us, we shall then certainly give up our 
lives to-day. 

Pandu said:— 

30. If your this determination be 
conformable to virtue, then I shall with you 
both follow the imperishable path of my 
father. 

31. Abandoning the luxuries of village and 
towns, robed in barks of trees and living 
on lruits and roots and practising the 
severest asceticism, I shall roam in the great 
forest. 

32. Bathing in the morning and in the 
evening, I shall perform the Homa. I shall 
reduce my body by eating sparingly ; I shall 
wear rags and skins ; I shall carry matted 
hair on my head. 

33. Exposing myself to heat and cold, 
and disregarding hunger and thirst, I shall 
reduce my body by performing most difficult 
asceticism. 

34. I shall live on fruits, ripe or unripe; 
I shall be in contemplation ; I shall worship 
the Pitris and the , celestials with speech 
and with the fruits of the forest. 

35. I shall not see the dwellers of cities 
or the dwellers of forest. I shall not 
even harm them (the dwellers of forest), not 
to speak of the dwellers of villages. 

36. I shall thus perform the severest 
practices of Vanaprastha , performing the 
severer ones gradually, till I lay down my 
body. 

Vaishampayaua said 

37—38. Having said this to his wives, 
the descendant of Kuru, the king (Pandu), 
gave his jewel of the diadem, his necklace of 
precious gold, his bracelets, his ear-rings, 
his valuable robes and the ornaments of the 
ladies to the Brahmanas. He then said, 

39—40. “Going to Hastinapur, inform 
all that Pandu, the descendant of Kuru has 
retired into the forest with his wives, 
abandoning wealth, desires, happiness and sexual 
appetite.’' The assembled followers and 
attendants, 

41. Hearing these and other sorrowful 
words of that lion of the Bharata race, 
bewailed in grief and cried, "Alas ! O !” 

42. They shed hot tears to leave the 
king. They left that forest and went to 
Hastinapur, taking all the wealth with them. 

43. Going to the city, they told the 
illustrious king all that had happened, and 
they gave him all the wealth. 

44. Having heard all that had happened 
in the great forest, the best of men, king 
Dhritarashtra, wept for Pandu. 

45. He derived no pleasure in the 
comforts of his beds, seats and luxuries. Afflicted 
with the loss of his brother, he continually 
brooded over it. 

46. The descendant of Kuru, the royal 
prince (Pandu), living on fruits and roots, 
went with his two wives to the Nagasata 
mountains. 

47. He then went to Chaitraratha, and 
then to Kalakuta. Crossing the Himalayas, 
he went to Gandhamadana. 

48. Protected by Mahabhutas, Siddhas 
and great Rishis, that great king lived  
sometimes on the plains and sometimes on the 
bills. 

49. He then went to the lake Indradumna 
; and then crossing the Hansakuta, 
the great king performed his penances on 
the mountain with hundred peaks. 

thus ends the hundred and nineteenth 
Section , the history of Pandu, in the Sambhava 
of the Adi Parva. 


Section 120 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. That greatly powerful man (Pandu; 
was there engaged in the best of asceticism ) 
and he soon became the favourite of all the 
Siddhas and Charnas. 

2. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
he was devoted to the service of his preceptors; 
he was free from vanity ; he was self- 
controlled and master over his passions. The 
powerful man went to heaven by his own 
prowess. 

3. He became the brother of some, 
and the friend of others, the others again 
treated him as their own son. 

4. O best of the Bharata race, after a 
long time Pandu acquired those great and 
sinless ascetic merits, by which he became 
like a Brahmarsi. 

5. On a new moon day the Rishis of 
rigid vows aassembled together, and were 
about to start with the desire of seeing 
Brahma. 

6. Seeing the Rishis about to start, 
Pandu said, "O best of eloquent men, tell 
me where you are going.” 

The Rishi said 

7. There will be a great assemblage of 
high-souled celestials, Rishis and Pitris in 
the abode of Brahma. We shall go there ; 
we are desirous of seeing the self-created 
(Brahma). 

Vaishampayana said 

8. Pandu suddenly rose with the desire 
of going with the Rishis and reaching 
the heaven. When he was about to start 
with his two wives in a northerly direction 
from the mountains with the hundred peaks, 
the ascetics addressed him thus, 

9. “ In our northward march, ascending 
the king of mountains, higher and higher 
we have seen many delightful and inaccessible 
regions, on the breast of the hill. 

10. (We have seen) the retreats of the 
celestials, Gand harvas and Apsaras, with 
hundreds of palaces resounding with the 
sweet note of celestial music. 

11. (We have seen) the gardens of 
Kuvera, laid out on even and uneven grounds 
and the banks of great rivers and mountain 
caverns. 

12. There are regions (on that mountain) 
everlastingly covered with snow and devoid 
of birds and beasts and trees. There are 
some places, where rain is so heavy that they 
are perfectly inaccessible and unlit for
habitation. 

13. Not to speak of other creatures, even 
birds can not cross them. The only thing 
that can go there is air, and only beings 
Siddhas and great Rishis, 

14. O best of the Bharata race, these 
princesses are unaccustomed to hardship; 
how will they ascend those heights of the king 
of mountains ? therefore, do not come with 
us. 

Pandu said 

15. O greatly fortunate ones, it is said 
that there is no heaven for a sonless. I am 
sonless. I speak to you in sorrow. 

16. O great ascetics, I am sorry, because 
I have not been able to free myself from 
the debt I owe to my forefathers. In the 
dissolution of my body, my ancestors are 
sure to perish. 

17. Men are born in this world with 
four debts,—namely the debts due to the 
ancestors, the celestials, the Rishis and other 
men. They must be discharged with virtue. 

18. It has been established by the learned 
men that no regions of bliss exist for those 
who neglect to pay in due time these debts. 

19. The celestials are paid (gratified) by 
sacrifices, the Rishis by study and meditation, 
the Pitris by begetting children and 
performing Sraddha , and the other men by 
humanity and kindness. 

20. I have virtuously discharged my 
debts to the celestials, Rishis and other 
men. But there are those (Pitris) who 
are sure to perish at the dissolution of my 
body. 

21. O ascetics, I am not as yet free from 
the debt I owe to my ancestors. The best 
of men were born to beget children to discharge 
that debt. 

22. As I was begotten by the great Rishi 
on the field of my father, so should children 
be begotten on my soil (wives). 

The Rishis said 

23. O virtuous-minded man, O king, 
there is progeny for you that will he sinless, 
greatly fortunate and like the celestials  
themselves. We see this with our prophetic 
eyes. 

24. O best of kings, therefore, accomplish 
the purposes of the celestials by your acts. 
The intelligent man who acts with deliberation 
always obtains good fruits. 

25. therefore, O king, you should exert 
yourself. The fruits you will obtain is visible. 
You will surely obtain accomplished and 
agreeable sons. 

Vaishampayana said — 

26. Having heard these words of the 
ascetics, and remembering the loss of his 
procreative power owing to the curse of the 
deer, Pandu began to reflect 

27. He told his lawfully wedded wife 
illustrious Kunti, in private, “ Try to raise 
offspring at this emergency. 

28. O Kunti, the wise expounders of the 
eternal religion say that son is the source of 
virtuous fame in the three worlds. 

29. Sacrifices, gifts in charity, ascetic 
penanees, and carefully observed vows, do 
not free a sonless man from his sins. 

30. O lady of sweet smiles, knowing all 
this, I am certain that sonless as I am, I 
shall not obtain the regions of felicity. 

31. O timid lady, as I was formerly  
addicted to cruel acts and led a vicious life, 
I have lost my power of procreation by the 
curse of the deer. 

32. O Pritha, the religious books  
mention of six kinds of sons who are both heirs 
and kinsmen, and six kinds more who are 
not heirs, but kinsmen; I shall speak of them
listen to me. 

33—34 (They are), 1. Aurasha (the son 
begotten by one’s own self on his own wife), 2 
Pranita (the son begotten on one's own 
wife by an accomplished person), 
3. Parikrita (the son begotten on one’s wife by 
a man for a pecuniary consideration), 4; 
Paunarvava (the son begotten on a wife 
after her husband’s death), 5. Kanin (the 
son born in the maidenhood), 6. Kunda 
(the son born of a woman who had 
intercourse with four persons), 7. Dattya (the 
son given by another), 8. Krita (the son 
bought from another), 9. Upakrita (the 
son coming to one out of gratitude), 10. 
Sayang upagata the son coming himself to 
give him away, 11. Shada (the son born 
of a pregnant bride), 12. Hina Jonidhrita 
(the son born of a wife of a lower caste.) 

35. On the failure of getting offspring of 
the first class, the mother should try to get 
the offspring of the next class and so on. 
At the time of emergency (failure of offspring), 
men raise up sons by their 
accomplished younger brothers. 

36. O Pritha, the self-created Manu has 
said that men, failing to obtain son of their 
own, might raise up excellent virtue-giving 
sons by others. 

37. As I am destitute of the power of 
procreation, I command you to raise  
illustrious offspririg by some men equal or 
superior to me. 

38. O Kunti, hear the history of that 
wife of a hero, the daughter of Saradayana, 
who raised offspring at the command of her 
lord. 

39. O Kunti, after the bath when her
season came, she went in the night to a 
place where four roads met. Worshippihg 
a Brahmana who was crowned with ascetic 
success, she poured libations in the fire of 
Pungsavana. 

40. After performing this, she lived with 
him ; and thus were begotten on her three 
sons, Durjaya being the eldest. 

41. O greatly fortunate lady, like her 
you too at my command raise offspring by 
some Brahmana who is superior to me in 
ascetic merits. 

thus ends the hundred and twentieth 
Section , the colloquy between Pandu and 
Pritha, in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 


Section 121

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O great king, having been thus 
addressed. Kunti replied to her heroic lord, 
king Pandu, the best of the Kurus. 

Kunti said •— 

2. O virtuous one, you should not say so 
to me. O lotus-eyed one, I am your lawfully
wedded wife, ever devoted to you. 

3. O mighty-armed descendant of the 
Bharata race, you should in righteousness 
beget on me greatly powerful children. 

4. O best of men, I shall go to heaven 
with you. O descendant of Kuru, embrace 
me to beget offspring. 

5. I shall not certainly, even in imagination
accept any other man "except you in 
my embrace. Who is there in this world 
who could be superior to you ? 

6. O virtuous-minded man, O large
eyed one, hear the (following) Pauranic 
narrative which was heard by me and which I 
shall now narrate to you. 

7. 44 In ancient times there was a king 
known by the name of Vyushitashwa, the 
expander of the Puru dynasty, who was 
exceedingly virtuous, 

8. In the sacrifice which that virtuous 
and mighty-armed man performed, the 
celestials with Indra and Devarshis came. 

9. In the sacrifice of the illustrious royal 
sage Vyushitashwa, Indra was so intoxicated 
with Soma drink and the Brahmanas 
with Dhakshina (offerings) that the celestials
and the Brahmana Rishis performed 
everything of it themselves. 

10. O king, thereupon Vyushitashwa 
began to shine over all creatures like the 
sun after the season of frost. 

11. O best of kings, he conquered all 
the monarchs of the east, west, north 
and south, and he exacted tribute from them 
all. 

12. O king, he was endued with the 
strength of ten elephants. Vyusitashwa did 
all this in his great Horse-sacrifice. 

13. O best of the Kurus, the men,learned 
in the Puranas, sing this verse in order to 
increase the fame of that king of men, 
Vyusitashwa. 

14. Vyusitashwa has conquered the whole 
earth as far as the sea. He protects all 
classes of his subjects as a father protects his 
own sons. 

15. He performed many sacrifices and 
gave away much wealth to the Brahmanas. 
Collecting jewels and precious stones, he 
performed afterwards great sacrifices. 

16. Extracting a large quantity of Soma 
juice, he performed (the great sacrifice) Soma 
Sangstha. O king, his beloved wife was 
the daughter of Kakshivana, named Vadra, 
unrivalled on earth for her beauty. 

17—18. We have heard, they deeply 
loved each other. He was seldom separated 
from his wife. Intercourse with her 
brought in Consumption, and he soon died 
sinking like the sun in its glory. She  
became afflicted with great grief at her  
husband’s death. 

19. O best of men, O king, hear how 
Vadra, being childless and afflicted with 
grief, bewailed for her husband. I shall 
recount it. 

Vadra said 

20. O greatly learned man in religious 
precepts, women serve no purpose when 
their husband is dead. She who lives without
her husband lives a miserable life. 

21. O best of Kshatriyas, death is
preferable to one who has lost her husband. I 
wish to follow the way you have gone. Be 
kind towards me and take me with you. 

22. I am unable in your absence to 
bear life for a moment. O king, be kind 
to me and take me soon away. 

23. O best of men, I shall follow you 
over even and uneven ground. Going with 
you, I shall never return again. 

24. O king, I shall follow you as a 
shadow. I shall be always obedient to you. 
O best of kings, I shall ever remain engaged 
in doing your favourite works. 

25. O king, O lotus-eyed, from this day 
the heart-sucking affliction will always  
overwhelm me for your death. 

26. Unfortunate am I! Some loving 
ample had no doubt been separated by me 
in my former life. From this I am separated 
from you. 

27. O king, she, who lives even for a 
moment after being separated from her  
husband, that sinful woman, lives in great 
misery and in hell. 

28. Some loving couple must have been 
separated by me in my former birth ; from 
that sin, acquired in my former body

29. O king, I now suffer this great pain 
in consequence of your separation from me. 
O king, from this day I snail lie on Kusha 
grass. 

30. I shall abstain from every luxury, 
being ever desirous of seeing you. O best of 
men, show yourself to me. O king of men, 
O lord, command your wretched and bitterly 
weeping wife, plunged in great misery. 

Kunti said 

31. It was thus she bewailed again and 
again embracing the corpse (of her husband). 
She was then addressed by an invisible 

The voice said 

32. O Yadra, rise up and leave this place. 
I grant you this boon. O lady of sweet 
smiles, I shall beget offspring on you. 

33. O beautiful featured lady, lie down 
with me on your bed on the eighth or the 
fourteenth day of the moon after the bath of 
your season. 

Kunti said 

34. Having been thus addressed by the 
invisible voice, the chaste lady (Vadra), desirous of offspring, did as she was directed. 

35. O best of the Bharatas, O excellent 
descendant of the Bharata race, that lady 
gave birth to three Shalyas and four Madras 
by that corpse.' 

36. O best of the Bharatas, you too like 
him beget offspring by your ascetic power. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty first 
Section , the history of Vyusitashwa, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 

Section 122
(SAMBHAVA PARVA).— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Having been thus addressed, the king 
(Pandu), learned in the precepts of religious
spoke these words of virtuous import 
to that lady (his wife). 

Pandusaid 

2. O Kunti, what you have said is true. 
Vyusitashwa of old did exactly as you said ; 
he was like a celestial. 

3. But I shall tell you the religious  
precepts which the illustrious Rishis, learned 
in the precepts of virtue, said in the 
Puranas. 

4. O beautiful featured lady, O lady 
of sweet smiles, women were not formerly 
kept within the house. They used to go 
about freely and enjoyed as they liked. 

5. O fortunate lady, O beautiful one, 
they had promiscuous intercourse from 
their maidenhood, and they were not faithful 
to their husbands. But they were not 
regarded sinful, for it was the custom of 
the age. 

6. That very ussage of the olden time 
is up to date followed by birds and beasts,, 
and they are free from anger and passions 
(for this primiscuous intercourse). 

7. O lady of tapering thighs, the practice,- 
being sanctioned by preciaents, is praised 
by great Rishis ; it is still regarded with 
respect by the Northern Kurus. 

8. O lady of sweet smiles, this eternal 
ussage, very favourable to the women, had 
the sanction of antiquity ; the present 
practice has been established only very 
lately. Hear, I shall narrate to you in detail 
who established it, and why. 

9. We have heard that there was a great 
Rishi, named Uddalaka. He had a son, 
known by the name of Swetaketu, who was 
also a Rishi. 

10. O lotus-eyed one, the present virtuous 
practice was established by that Swetaketu
in anger. I shall tell you why he did 
it. 

11. One day in the time of yore, in the 
very presence of Swetakatu's father, a 
Brahmana came, and taking his (Swetaketu's) mother by the hand said, “ Let us go." 

12. Having seen his mother taken away 
as if by force, the son of the Rishi grew 
angry and became very much afflicted with 
sorrow. 

13. Seeing him angry, his father told 
Swetaketu, “ O child, do not be angry. 
This is an eternal ussage. 

14. The women of all the orders on 
earth are free. O son, men, in this matter 
as regards their respective orders, act as 
kine." 

15. The son of the Rishi, Swetaketu, 
disapproved of this ussage, and he established 
the following practice on earth as 
regards men and women. 

16. O greatly illustrious lady, we have 
heard that the present practice among men 
and women, dates from that day but not 
among other animals. 

Swetaketu said:— 

17. The wife, not adhering to her husband,
will be sinful from this date ; she will 
commit as great and painful sin as the 
killing of an embryo. 

18. The men, who will go to other 
women neglecting a chaste and loving wife 
who has from her maidenhood observed a 
vow of purity, will commit the same sin. 

19. The woman, who being commanded 
by her husband to raise offspring, will refuse 
to do it, will commit also the same sin. 

Pandu said ; — 

20. O timid lady, it was thus established 
by force in olden time the present virtuous 
ussage by Uddalaka’s son Swetaketu.' 

21. O lady of the tapering thighs, we 
have heard that Madayanti, being appointed
by (her husband) Saudasa, went to 
Rishi Vasishta to raise up offspring. 

22. That lady obtained from him a son, 
named Asmaka. She did this, moved by the 
desire of doing good to her husband. 

23. O lotus-eyed one, O timid girl, you 
know our birth, begotten by Krishna 
Dwaipayana, in order to expand the Kuru race. 

24. O faultless one, seeing all these 
precedents, you should do my bidding which 
is not inconsistent with virtue. 

25—2 6. O princess, O devoted wife, the 
men learned in the precepts of virtue, said 
that a wife in her season must seek her 
husband, though she may be free at other 
times. The wise have said that this was 
the ancient practice. 

27. But, O princess, men, learned in the 
Vedas, have declared that whether the act 
be sinful or sinless, it is the duty of the 
wife to do what her husband commands 

28. O lady of faultless features, especially 
I who am deprived of the power of pro¬ 
creation, having yet become desirous of 
seeing son, should more to be obeyed by 
you. 

29. O amiable girl, joining my palms 
furnished with rosy fingers like lotus-leaves, 
I place my hand on your head to propitiate 
you. 

30. O lady of beautiful hair, you should 
raise accomplished sons at my command by 
the help of same Brahmanas possessed of 
great ascetic merits. O lady of beautiful 
ips, by your doing this, I shall go to the 
way reserved for those that are blessed 
with sons. 

Vaishampayana said 

31. Having been thus addressed by that 
subjugator of hostile cities, Pandu, the 
beautiful Kunti, ever engaged in doing good 
to her husband, thus replied, 

Kunti said 

32. O lord, I was engaged in my girlhood 
at my father’s house in attending upon 
all guests: I attentively served the  
Brahmanas of rigid vows. 

33 I gratified with all attentions that 
Brahmana, known as Durvasa, who had 
all his posslons under control, and who 
was acquainted with all the mysteries of 
religion. 

34. Pleased with the attention with which 
I waited upon him, that illustrious (Brahmana) 
gave me a boon in the form of a 
Afantra. He told me, 

35. “ Any of the celestials, whom you will 
call by this (Mantra), will be obedient to 
you, whether he likes it or not. 

36. O princess, by each of their favour, 
you, shall have offspring.” O descendant of  
the Bharata race, this was told to me by him 
at my father’s house. 

37. O king, the words, uttered by the 
Brahmana, can never be false; the time has 
come when they may yield fruits. 
Commanded by you, I can call the celestials 

38. By that Mantra to raise up good 
offspring. O royal sage, O foremost of 
truthful men, tell me which of the celestials 
I shall call. Know, I wait your commands 
in this matter. 

Pandu said 

39. O beautiful lady, O amiable one! 
try to do it to-day in the proper form. Call, 
Dharma (the god of justice), for he is the 
most virtuous in the world. 

40. O beautiful lady, Dharma will never 
be able to pollute us with sin, and people will 
also consider that what we do is never 
sinful. 

41. There is no doubt the son thus
begotten will be virtuous among the Kurus. 
Begotten by Dharma,his mind will never be 
in sin. 

42. Therefore, O lady of sweet smiles, 
keeping virtue before your eyes and obser¬ 
ving all vows, call Dharma by the help of
your solicitations and incantations. 

Vaishampayana said 

43. That best of women, (Kunti), having 
been thus addressed, said "Be it so.” She 
then went round him (for seven times) and 
resolved to do his bidding. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty 
second chapter, the account of the raising 
up of Kunti's children, in the Sambhava
of the Adi Parva.


Section 123

(SAMBHAVA PARVA ).— 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. O Janamejaya, when Gandhari was 
pregnant for a year, it was then that Kunti 
called the eternal Dharma for offspring. 

2. That lady (Kunti) offered adorations 
to Dharma and repeated in the proper form 
the Mantra , formerly given to her by  
Durvasa. 

3. The deity Dharma, being overpowered 
by the Mantra came on his car resplendent 
as the sun to the place where Kunti 
was seated. 

4. Smiling he said to her, “O Kunti, 
what am I to give you ?" Kunti also 
smilingly said, "You must give me offspring" 

5. She was united with Dharma in his 
Yoga (spiritual) form, and that beautiful 
lady obtained a son devoted to the good 
of all creatures. 

6—7. She gave birth to an excellent 
son, who became afterwards greatly 
famous, at the eighth Muliurta called 
Abhijit of the hour of noon of that very auspicious 
day of the eight month, the fifth of the 
white fort-night, when the star Jeshta in 
conjunction with moon was in ascendant. 
As soon as the child was born, an invisible 
voice said, 

8. “This (child) will be the best of men 
and the foremost of all the virtuous. He 
will be truthful and (also) greatly powerful; 
he will be the ruler of the earth. 

9. This eldest son of Pandu will be 
known as Yudhishthira; he will be a famous 
king, known all over the three worlds. 

10. He will be endued with splendour, 
fame and vows. Having obtained this 
virtuous son, Pandu again told her, 

11. “The wise say that Kshatriyas are 
the foremost in strength ; therefore, ask for a 
son of great strength . Having been thus 
addressed, she invoked Vayu. 

12. Thereupon the greatly strong Vayu 
came to her riding on a deer, (and he asked), 
“O Kunti, what am I to give you ? Tell me 
what is in your mind." 

13. Smiling in bashfalness, she said, 
“O best of celestials, give me a son, who is 
strong, who is huge and who is capable 
of humbling the pride of everybody." 

14. By him was born Bhima, endued 
with great strength ; and on the birth of this 
greatly strong man, an invisible voice 
said. 

15. "This child will be foremost of all 
endued with strength" O descendant of 
the Bharata race, the following 
extraordinary incident happened as soon as 
Bhima was born. 

16—18. Falling from his mother's lap on the 
mountain he broke into fragments the stone 
on which he fell. Kunti suddenly rose up from 
the fear of a tiger, forgetting that the child 
lav asleep on her lap. As she rose, the child, 
whose body was as hard as the thunder-bolt 
fell on the stone and broke it into a hundred 
pieces. Seeing the breaking of the stone, 
randu became very much astonished. 

19. O best of Bharatas, the day on 
which Bhima was born, on that very day. 
the king of the world, Duryodhana, was also 
born. 

20. On the birth of Bhima, Pandu again 
began to reflect, “How can I obtain a very 
superior son who will be the best of 
men ? 

21. This world depends on Daiva 
(Destiny) and Purushakara (exertion). But 
Destiny is gained in time by the grace of 
Providence. 

22. We have heard that Indra is the 
foremost (among the celestials) and the king 
of the Devas. He is endued with 
immeasurable might, energy, prowess and glory. 

23. Gratifying him by my asceticism, I 
shall obtain a greatly powerful son. The 
son that he will give me will be superior to all.

24. He will be capable of defeating the 
inhabitants of earth and those who are not 
of this earth, I shall, therefore practise 
severest asceticism with heart, deed and 
speech. 

25. Thereupon the descendant of Kuru, 
the great king Pandu, after consulting with 
the great Rishis, commanded Kunti to 
observe an auspicious vow for one full year. 

26. That mighty-armed man (Pandu). 
himself stood upon his one leg and began to 
perform the severest asceticism and penances. 

27. He practised severe austerities from 
morning to evening with his mind deep in 
meditation in order to gratify the lord of the 
celestials, it was after a long time that 
Indra appeared. 

Indra said— 

28. I shall give you a son who will be 
famous all over the three worlds and who 
will promote the welfare of the Brahmanas, 
kine and all honest men. 

29. The son that I shall give you will be 
the chastiser of the wicked and the delight of 
his friends and relations. He will be the 
foremost of all and the slayer of all foes. 

30. Having been addressed by the illustrious Indra, the virtuous Kuru king 
(Pandu), remembering the words of the 
king of the celestials said to Kunti, 

Pandu said 

31. O fortunate one, your vow has been 
successful. The king of the celestials is 
gratified. He is willing to give you a son 
such as you desire to have. 

32—33. O lady of beautiful thighs, O 
lady of sweet smiles, raise up a son, (who 
will be) of superior human achievements and 
great fame, (who will be) a chastiser of 
enemies and a greatly wise man, (who will 
possess) a great soul, (who will be) invincible 
n battle, (who will be) as effulgent as the 
sun (who will be) very handsome, and endued 
with all the Kshatriya splendour. Call the 
lord of the celestials, I have gratified him. 

Vaishampayana said 

34. Having been thus addressed, the 
illustrious Kunti invoked Indra. The lord 
of the celestials came and begot Arjuna. 

35. As soon as the prince was born, an 
invisible voice filled the whole sky with a 
loud and deep roar. 

36. Addressing Kunti, it said in a distinct 
voice in the hearing of every creature
dwelling in that hermitage, 

37. “ O Kunti, (this child) will be equal 
to Kartavirya and Siva in prowess ; he will 
be invincible like Indra himself. He will 
spread your fame everywhere.

36. As Vishnu enhanced Aditi's joy, so 
Arjuna (this child) like Vishnu will enhance 
your joy, 

39. He will maintain the Lakshmi (goddess of prosperity) of the Kuru dynasty by 
subjugating Madra, the Somakhas with the 
Kurus, Chedi, Kashi and Kurusha. 

40. Agni will be greatly gratified with 
the fat of all creatures which will be burnt 
in the Khandava (forest) through the 
strength of arms of this (hero). 

41. This greatly powerful hero with his 
brothers will conquer all the weak kings, and 
perform three great horse-sacrifices. 

42. O Kunti, he will be equal to the son 
of Jamadagni (Parashurama) and Vishnu 
in prowess. He will be the foremost of all 
men endued with great strength ; he will be 
greatly famous. 

43. He will gratify in battle the great 
god Sankara (Siva), and he will receive from 
him a weapon, named Paskupata, which will 
be given to him with pleasure. 

44. By command of Indra, your this 
mighty-armed son will kill those Daityas , 
called Nivatkabachas , who are enemies of 
the celestials. 

45. He will also acquire all kinds of 
celestial weapons; and this best of men will 
retrieve the lost fortunes of his race.' 

Vaishampayana said:— 

46—47. Kunti heard these extraordinary 
words in her lying-in-room. Having heard 
these words, so loudly uttered, the ascetics, 
dwelling on that mountain with hundred 
peaks and the celestials with Indra sitting on 
their cars, became exceedingly happy. 

48. The sounds of dRurus rose in the 
sky and made a great noise; and the whole 
palace was covered with the showers of 
owers. 

49. The various tribes of the celestials 
assembled to adore Partha (Arjuna). The 
sons of Kadru, the son of Binata, the
Gandharvas, 

50. The lords of the creatures, the 
seven great Rishis, namely, Bharadwaja, 
Kashyapa, Gautama, Vishwamitra, 
Jamadagni, Vashista and the illustrious Atri. 
who illuminated the world when the sun 
was lost came there. 

51. Marichi, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha 
Kratu, the Prajapati Daksha, the Gandharvas 
and the Apsaras, all came there. 

52. The Apsara ladies, decked with 
celestial garlands and every ornament 
and attired in fine robes, began to dance 
chanting the praises of Vibhatsa (Arjuna). 

53. The great Rishis began to utter 
the propitiatory Mantras every where; and 
handsome Turn vara began to sing. 

54—58. Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Urnayus
Anagha, Gopati, Dhritarashtra, Surja, Varcha,
Yugapa, Trinapa, Krashni, Nandi, 
Chitraratha, Salisira, Parjanya, Kali, 
Narada, Soddha, Vrihaddha, Brihaka, 
Karala, Brahmachari, Vahuguna, Suvaraa, 
Vishwasu, Bhumanya, Suchandra, Saru. 
the celebrated tribes of Haha and Huhu, 
gifted with sweet melody of voice,—O king, 
all these celestials and Gandharvas came 
there. 

59. Many famous Apsaras of large eyes, 
decked in every ornament, came there in 
joy to dance and sing. 

60—63. Anuchana, Anavadya, Guna- 
mukha, Gunavara, Adrilcb, Soma, M«ra- 
keshi, Ahimvusha, Marichi,' Suchikn, 
Vidyutpama, Tilatama, Amvica, Laksh¬ 
in ana, Kshema, Devi, Rambha, Mono- 
roma, Ashita, Suvahu, Suprya, Suvapu, 
Pundarika, Sugandha, Surasha, Pramathmi 

Kamya, and Saradwati, all danced there 
together. Menaka, Sahajanya, Kamlka, 
Panjikasthala, 

64—65. Ritusthala, Ghritachi, Viswachi, 
Purvacheti, Umlocha, Pramlocha, and 
Urvashi, these large eyed dancing girls of 
heaven all came there and sang in chorus. 
Dhatri, Arjamana, Mittra, Varuna, Angsa, 
Vaga, 

66—67. Indra, Vivashwata, Pushana, 
Tastri, Savita, Parjanya alias Vishnu,— 
these twelve Adityas glorified the son of 
Pandu remaining in the sky. Mrigabhyadha, 
Sarpa, illustrious Niriti, 

68. Ajaikapada, Ahivardhana, Pinakin, 
Dahana, Iswara, Kapalin, Sthanu and the 
illustrious Bhaga,—these eleven Rudras 
also came there. 

69. The Aswinis, the eight Vasus, the 
mighty Maruts, the Vishwadevas and the 
Saddhyas also came there. 

70—71. Karkotoka, Vasuki, Kachapa, 
Kunda and the great Naga Takshaka, those 
mighty and wrathful Nagas possesed of 
ascetic merits, and other Nagas also came 
there. 

72. Tarkha, Arishtanemi, Garuda, Ashi- 
dhaia, Aruna and Aruni of the race of Vinata 
also came there. 

73. Only the great Rishis, who were 
crowned with ascetic success, saw those  
celestials and others seated on their cars or 
standing on the mountain peaks. The 
others could not see them. 

74. Those excellent Rishis were astonished 
to see that wonderful sight, and their love 
and affection for Pandu's sons were 
enhanced, 

75. The illustrious Pandu, desirous of 
getting more sons, wished to speak again to 
his lawful wife, but Kunti addressed him 
thus, 

76. “The learned men do not sanction a 
fourth delivery (conception) even in an 
emergency. The woman who holds  
intercourse with four different men is called  
Sairini , with five she becomes a harlot. 

77. O learned man, well-acquainted as 
you are with the scriptures, why being tempted 
by the desire of offspring, do you ask 
me again, forgetting the ordinance.” 

thus ends the" hundred and twenty third 
Section , the birth of the Pandavas, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 124

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued 

Vaishampayana said 

I. After the birth of the sons of Kunti 
and that of the sons of Dhritarashtra, the 
daughter of the king of Madra privately 
spoke to Pandu thus. 

Madri said 

3. O chastiser of foes, I can have no 
complaint, if you do not favourably look at 
me. O sinless one, I have no complaint that 
though I am by birth superior (to Kunti), 
yet I am inferior to her in station. 

3. O descendant of Kuru, O king, I do 
not grieve, hearing that Gandhari has 
obtained one hundred sons. 

4. This is my great grief (however) that 
though we are both equal, you should 
have sons by Kunti alone. 

5. If the princess Kunti so provide that 
I should have offspring, she would do me a 
great favour, and she will also do you good. 

6. Kunti is my rival, and therefore, I feel 
a delicacy in soliciting any favour from her. 
If you are favourably inclined towards me, 
ask her to grant me my desire, 

Pandu Said 

7. O Madri, I have often-reflected over 
this matter in my own mind. But I hesitated 
to tell you, not knowing whether you 
would like it or no. 

8. Now that I know your mind, I shall 
certainly try to do it. I think, being asked 
by me, she (Kunti) will not refuse. 

Vaishampayana said 

9—10. Thereupon Pandu again spoke 
to Kunti in private; (he said), “O blessed 
lady, grant me some more offspring for the 
good of my race and of the whole world. 
Provide that I myself, my ancestors and you 
also, may always have the funeral cake. 

II. In order to gain fame, do this difficult 
work for me. Indra, though he has 
obtained the sovereignty of the celestials, 
performs sacrifices for fame alone. 

12. O handsome lady, Brahmanas, 
learned in Mantras , after having acquired 
ascetic merits most difficult to be achieved, 
still go to their preceptors for fame. 

13. All the royal sages and Brahmanas, 
possessed of ascetic wealth, have achieved 
the most difficult of feats for fame alone. 

14. O blameless one, rescue Madri with 
a raft of offspring; and achieve 
imperishable fame by making her a mother of 
children,” 

15. Having been thus addressed, Kunti 
said to Madri, “ Think of some celestial, 
front whom you will certainly get offspring.” 

16. Thereupon, Madri, reflecting  
, thought of the twin Aswinis. They 
came to her without delay and begot 
offspring on her, 

17. Namely Nakula and Sahadeva, 
matchless in beauty on earth. On the birth 
of that twin, the invisible voice said :— 

18. “These virtuous and accomplished 
sons- will transcend in energy and beauty 
even the twin Aswinis themselves. 
Possessed of great energy and beauty, they 
illuminated the whole region. 

19. The inhabitants (Rishi) of the mountain
with the hundred peaks, uttering blessings
on them and performing the first rites 
of birth, named them. 

20. The eldest of the Kunti’s sons was 
called Yudhishthira, the second was named 
Bhimasena, and the third was named 
Arjuna.  

21. The first born of the twins among 
Madri’s sons was named Nakula and the 
next one Sahadeva. The Brahmanas with 
much pleasure named them thus. 

22. Those best of Kurus, the sons of 
Pandu, looked like five years old boys when 
they were only one year of age. 

23. Seeing his sons endued with 
celestial beauty and extraordinary strength, 
with super-abundant energy, prowess and 
largeness of mind, Pandu, 

24.. The king, became exceedingly glad 
obtaining such sons. To all the Rishis, 
inhabitants of the mountain with the hundred 
peaks, 

25. And to their wives, they became 
great favourites. Sometime after, Pandu 
again requested Kunti for Madri, 

26. In private, when the faathfu! Pritha 
replied to him thus, “Having given her the 
Mantra only for once, she lias got two sons. 
I have been deceived by her. 

27. I fear she will surparss me in the 
number of her children. This is the way of 
all wicked women, fool I was, I did not 
know that by invoking the twin gods, I 
might get two sons all at once. 

28—29. Do not command me again, I 
ask from you this boon”. Thus were born to 
Pandu five sons, begotten by the celestials 
and endued with great strength. They 
achieved great fame and expanded the 
Kuru race. They were all as handsome as 
Soma and bore all the auspicious marks on 
their persons. 

30. They were proud as lions; they were 
great bowmen ; their necks were like those 
of lions, and they were capable of going to 
the place frequented by lions. These kings 
of men endued with the prowess of the celestials
daily grew up. 

31. Seeing them and their virtuous 
growth with years, the great Rishis, dwelling
on the Himalaya mountains, were filled 
with astonishment and wonder. 

32. These five (Pandavas) and the hundred 
(sons of Dhritarashtra), the expanders 
of the Kuru race, grew up rapidly like an 
assembly of lotuses in a lake. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty fourth 
chapter, the birth of the Pandavas, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 125

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued, 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Seeing his five handsome sons before 
him in the great forest on the charming 
mountain slope, Pandu felt that the old 
strength of his arms had come back. 

2. One day in the season of spring which 
maddens aH creatures, the king (Pandu) with 
his wife (Madri) roamed in the woods where 
every tree was blossomed. 

3. He saw Palashas, Titakas, Mangoes, 
Champakas, Paripardakas , and Karnikaras 
Kesharas, Atimuktas. 

4—5. And Kuruvakas , with maddened 
humming Vramaras (black bees) swarming 
round them. He saw the blossoming Parijata 
trees with the Kakila, pouring forth his 
melodics from within the foliage and being 
echoed with the sweet hum of the bees. 
There were also many other trees bent 
down with the weight of their flowers and 
fruits. 

6. There were many lakes overgrown 
with lotuses. Seeing all this, Pandu felt the 
influence of (the god of love in his mind. 

7. In a delightful heart he roamed there 
like a celestial, followed by (his wife) Madri, 
who was robed in a semi-transparent cloth. 

8. Seeing the youthful Madri thus attired, 
the king’s desire flamed up like a forest 
fire. 

9. The king could not suppress his 
desire on seeing his lotus-eyed wife, and he 
was completely overcome by it in that 
solitude of the wood. 

10. The king then seized her by force, 
but Madri, trembling in fear, resisted him 
to the best of her power. 

11. He (the king) was then overcome by 
desire ; he did not remember the curse (of 
the Rishi) ; he embraced Madri by force. 

12—13. O descendant of Kuru, 
unrestrained by the fear of curse, and  
impelled by fate, the king, being overpowered 
by passion, forcibly sought the embraces of 
his wife, as if to put an end to his life. His 
reason, being clouded by the Destroyer  
himself, after intoxicating his senses was itself 
lost with his life. 

14. The descendant of Kuru, virtuous 
minded Pandu succumbed to the inevitable 
influence of Time while united with his wife. 

15. Then Madri, embracing the senseless 
(dead) king, began repeatedly to utter 
words of lament. 

16. Kunti, with her sons and the sons of 
Madri, the Pandavas, came there where the 
king lay in that state. 

17. O king, Madri then crying pitiously 
said to Kunti, “Come here alone and let the 
children stay there.” 

18. Having heard her these words, Kunti 
bade the children to remain there, came 
running and crying, “Woe to me!” 

19. Seeing both Pandu and Madri lying 
prostrate on the ground, she bewailed in 
grief and affliction, saying, 

20. “This self-controlled hero was always 
watched by me with care. How did he  
embrace you, knowing the curse of the Rishi. 

21. O Madri, this king ought to have 
been protected by you ; but why did you 
tempt the king in solitude?

22. He was always melancholy, thinking 
the curse of the Rishi. How did he 
become merry with you in solitude? 

23. O princess of Valhika, greater fortunate 
you are than I . You have seen the face 
of the king in gladness and joy.” 

Madri said:— 

24. Sister, with tears in my eyes, I resisted 
the king, but he could not control himself, 
as if be was bent upon making the Rishis 
curse true. 

Kunti said:— 

25. I am the eldest of his wedded wives; 
the chief religious merit is mine. O Madri, 
therefore, prevent me not from what must 
come to pass. 

26. I must follow our lord to the region 
of the dead. Rise up,—give me the body, 
and you rear the children. 

Madri said 

27. I am still clasping our lord and have 
not allowed him to go away. Therefore, 
I shall follow him. I am not as yet satiated, 
you are my eldest sister, give me permission (to go.) 

28. This best of the Bharata race came 
to me with the desire of having intercourse. 
His desire was not satiated,—should I not go 
to the region of the Yama to gratify him ? 

29. O revered sister, if I survive you, it 
is certrin I shall not be able to rear up your 
and my own children (with equality) and 
thus sin will touch me. 

30. O Kunti, you will be able to bring up 
my sons as if they are yours. The king, in 
seeking me with desire, has gone to the 
region of the dead, 

31. therefore, my body should be burned 
with that of the king, O revered sister, do 
not refuse me your permission to what is 
agreeable to me. 

32. You will certainly bring up the children 
carefully. It would be doing the greatest
good to me. I do not find anything 
more to tell you. 

Vaishampayana said 

33. Having said this, the daughter of 
the king of Madra, the lawfully wedded wife 
of that best of men Pandu, ascended the 
funeral pyre of her lord. 

thus ends (he hundred and the twenty 
fifth Section , the death of Pandu, in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 126

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. The Rishis, who were all celestial-like 
and wise in council, seeing the death of 
Pandu, consulted with one another. 

The Rishis said 

2. The high-souled and the illustrious 
(Pandu), abandoning his sovereignty and 
Itingdom, came here to practise asceticism 
and received the protection of the ascetics.  

3. The king Pandu has gone to heaven, 
leaving his wife aud infant sons as a trust in 
our hands. 

4. It is now our duty to go to his kingdom 
with these his sons, his body (unburnt 
portion) and his wife. 

Vaishampayana said 

5—6. thus consulting with one another 
those god-like Rishis of magnanimous hearts 
and of ascetic success revived to go to the. 
city of Hastinapur with the sons of Pandu
in their front and to place them in the hands 
of Dhritarashtra and Bhishma. 

7. The ascetics started at that very 
moment, taking with them the boys, the 
two bodies and Kunti. 

8. The affectionate mother, Kunti, though 
she had all alone led a most comfortable 
life, now regarded the long journey as 
being very short, 

9. Arriving at Kurujangala within a very 
short time, the illustrious Kunti presented 
herself at the principal gate, 

10. The ascetics told the gate keepers 
"Go, inform the king." They went in a 
moment to the royal court and informed 
the king, 

11. The citizens of Hastinapur were 
filled with wonder on hearing that thousands 
of Charanas and Rishis had arrived at 
their city. 

12. It was soon after sunrise that the 
citizens all came with their wives and 
children, placing them in front, to see these 
ascetics. 

13. Seated on thousands of cars and 
conveyances, thousands of Kshatriyas and 
Brahmanas came out with their wives. 

14. The crowd of Vaisyas and Sudras 
was also very large. The vast crowd was very 
peaceful, because every one of them was 
then inclined to piety. 

15. The son of Shantanu, Bhishma,  
Somadatta or Valhika, the royal sage (Dhritarashtra) 
with the prophetic eyes, and Vidura 
himself, 

16. The venerable Satyavati, the illustrious  
princess of Kosala and Gandhari 
sorrounded by their maids,—all came out to 
the royal gate. 

17. The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra, 
with Duryodhana at their head, all decked 
with various ornaments, also came out. 

18. Seeing the great Rishis, the Kauravas 
with their priests bowed down their 
heads in salutations, and they all took 
their seats before them (Rishis), 

19. All the citizens also, bowing down 
their heads touching the ground in salutations,  
took their seats. 

20—21, O lord, Bhishma, seeing that 
vast crowd perfectly still, duly worshipped 
those ascetics by offering them water to 
wash their feet and the customary Arghya 
He then spoke to them about the 
sovereignty and kingdom. Thereupon, the 
eldest of the ascetics with matted locks and 
skin-cloth stood up, 

22. And with the concurrence of other 
great Rishis, he spoke thus, “The descendant 
of Kuru, the king, named Pandu, after 
abandoning pleasure and luxury, went to the 
mountain with the thousand peaks. 

23. He observed there the vow of  
Brahmacharya, but for some inscrutable 
purpose of the celestials, this his eldest 
son, Yudhishthira, was born, begotten by 
Dharma himself. 

24. Then that high-souled monarch was 
given another greatly powerful son by Vayu. 
This is that foremost of mighty men, who is 
called Bhima. 

25. This other son, begotten on Kunti by 
Indra, is Dhananjaya (Arjuna), whose 
achievements will humble all bow-men 
in the world. 

26. Look at these (two) best of men, the 
great bowmen, the twin boys, who were 
begotten by Aswinis on Madn. 

27. The almost extinct race of his
forefathers was thus revived by the illustrious 
Pandu, leading in piety the life of a  
recluse. 

28. The birth, growth and the Vedic 
studies of these sons of Pandu will no 
doubt give you much pleasure. 

29. Steadily adhering to the path 
of the virtuous and the wise, and leaving 
behind him these children, Pandu has gone 
to the land of the Pitris. 

30. Seeing him placed on the funeral 
pyre and about to be burnt down, his wife 
Madri entered the fire, thus sacrificing 
her life. 

31. She has thus gone with him to the 
land of Pati (reserved for chaste wives). 
Perform now those rites that should be 
performed for them. 

32. These are their bodies (unburnt 
portions) ; here also are their sons, the 
chastisers of foes, with their mother ; let 
them be received in due honour. 

33. After the completion of the first 
funeral rites, let the virtuous Pandu, the 
supporter of the dignity of the Kura race, 
gain the Pitrimedha (the blissful region of 
he Pitris). 

Vaishampayana said:— 

34 Having said this to the Kurus, the 
ascetics with the Rishi Guhakas instantly 
disappeared in the very sight of the Kurus. 

35. Seeing the Rishis disappear in their 
sight like the cities of the Gandharva 
(vapoury figures appearing and disappearing
in the sky) the citizens was filled with 
wonder and astonishment and returned 
to their homes. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty sixth 
Section , the speech of the Rishis , in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 


CHAP ER CXXVII . 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)—Continued. 

Dhritarashtra said 

1. O Vidura, perform the funeral 
ceremonies of that lion of kings, Pandu, and 
also, of Madri in all proper form. 

2. For the good of their souls, distribute 
cattle, cloths, gems and all kinds of wealth, 
and give every one as much as he asks. 

3. Make arrangements also for Kunti’s 
performance of the last rites of Madri in such 
a way as will please her. Let Madri’s body 
tie so carefully covered that neither the sun 
nor the wind may see it. 

4. Do not lament for the sinless Pandu ; 
he was a worthy king, and he has left behind 
him five sons like the celestial children. 

Vaishampayana said 

5. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
Vidura said, “Be it so” and he with Bhishma 
performed the funeral ceremony of Pandu 
on a sacred spot. 

6. O king, without loss of time the priests 
went out of the city carrying with them, the 
last fire for Pandu the fragrant and blazing 
sacred-fire, fed with Ghee. 

7—9. Friends, relatives and adherents, 
wrapping it up with cloth, decked the body 
of the king with the flowers of the season 
and sprinkled over it various perfumes. 
They decked the hearse also with garlands 
and rich hangings. Then placing the bodies 
of the king and the queen on the excellent 
bier, decked out so brightly, they caused it to 
be carried on the shoulders of men. 

10. With the white umbrela held over 
the hearse, with waving yak-tails, with  
sounds of various musical instRuruents, the 
whole scene looked bright and grand. 

11. Many hundreds of men began to 
distribute gems among the crowd at the 
time of the funeral ceremony of Pandu. 

12. White umbrelas, targe yak-tails and 
beautiful robes were then brought for the 
dead Kaurava. 

13. The priests, clad in white, walked in 
the van of the procession, pouring libations 
of ghee on the sacred-tire, blazing in an 
ornamental vessel, 

14. thousands of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras followed the king, 
weeping in grief. 

The citizens said:— 

15. O king, where do you go, leaving us 
behind and making us miserable and 
wretched for ever ? 

Vaishampayana said 

16. Bhishma, Vidura and the sons of 
Pandu all wept aloud. They at last came 
to a charming and holy wood on the banks of 
the Ganges. 

17. There they laid down the hearse oit 
which the truthful, the lion-hearted and the 
pious king and his wife lay. 

18—19. They then besmeared the bodies 
with all kinds of perfumes; they brought 
water in man> golden vessels and washed his 
body. They then again smeared it with 
white sandal. 

20. They then dressed it in a white 
dress made of national fabrics and smeared 
it with Kalagurti mixed with Tungarasha 
(sort of perfume.) 

21. With the new dress on, the king 
appeared like a living man, as if he was only 
sleeping on a costly bed. 

22—23. When the other funeral cere¬ 
monies were over, the Kauravas, with the 
direction of their priests, set fire to the bodies 
of the king and that of Madri which had 
been besmeared with ghee and decked 
with ornaments ; and they burnt them with 
the fragrant Sandal woods which yeas 
besmeared with Tungapadma and other 
perfumes. 

24. Seeing the bodies in flame, Kausalya 
cried out, “ O my son, O my son and .she 
fell senseless on the ground. 

25. Seeing her prostrate on the ground 
the citizens and the people wept in grief
for the affection they bore for the king. 

26. The beasts and birds bewailed with 
men at the lamentations of Kunti. 

27 . Then the son of Shantanu, Bhishma, the 
high-souled Vidura, and all the other Kurus 
became disconsolate in grief and sorrow 

28. Then Bhishma, Vidura, the king 
(Dhritarashtra), with the Pandavas and all 
the Kuru ladies, performed his (Pandu’s), 
water-ceremony. 

29. When the water-ceremony was over, 
the people, themselves filled with grief, 
began to console' the bereaved sons of 
Pandu. 

30. The Pandavas slept on the ground 
with their friends and relatives. O King, 
seeing this the Brahmanas and other citizens 
also gave up their bed. 

31. Young and old, all men grieved with 
the sons of Pandu and passed twelve days 
in mourning. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty seventh 
Section the cremation of Pandu , in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section 127

SAMBHAVA PARVA— Continued 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Then Bhishma, the king (Dhritarashtra) 
and Kunti with their friends, celebrated the 
Sradha of Pandu and offered the ambrosial 
Pinda. 

2. They feasted the Kurus and also 
many thousands of Brahmanas, whom they 
gave many gems, and much wealth with 
many villages. 

3. thus being cleansed from the impurity, 
they all returned to Hastinapur with those 
best of the Bharata race, the sons of Pandu. 

4. All the citizens and the people 
bewailed for that best of the Bharata race 
(Pandu), as if they had lost their own  
relative. 

5. After the completion of the Sradha, 
Vyasa, seeing all the people plunged in 
grief, spoke to his bereaved and greatly 
afflicted mother (Satyavati) thus, 

6. “The days of happiness are gone; the 
days of misery have come. Sin begins to 
increase day by day; the world has lost its 
youth. 

7. The fearful Time, endued with many 
Mayas, full of various faults, and loss 
of all virtuous acts, will now come. 

8. By the evil doings of the Kurus the 
world will be destroyed ; (therefore) go into 
the forest of asceticism, devoting yourself 
to Yoga meditation. 

9. Do not be an witness of the terrible 
annihilation of your own race.” Saying 
Be it so,’ she entered the inner
apartments and addressed her daughters-in-law 
thus, 

10. “O Ambika, I have heard that in 
consequence of the evil deeds of your 
grandsons, this Bharata dynasty with its 
subjects will perish. 

11. If you give me permission, I shall go 
to the forest with Kausalya, so grieved at 
the loss of her son." 

12. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
having said this to Ambika, and taking the 
permission of Bhishma, Satyavati of excellent 
vows went to the forest with her daughter 
in-law. 

13. O best of the Bharata race, she 
performed severe asceticism. O great king, 
she then gave up her body and obtained 
heaven. 

14. Then the sons of king Pandu, after 
performing all the purifying rites mentioned 
in the Vedas, began to grow up in a royal 
style in the house of their father. 

15. They played in great joy with the 
sons of Dhritarashtra , and they excelled them 
all in the boyish sports with their superior 
strength. 

16. In speed, in striking the object aimed 
at, in eating, in scattering dust, Bhimasena 
beat all the sons of Dhritarashtra. 

17. O King, that son of Pandu (Bhima)
when they were all engaged in sports, 
pulled them by the hair and made them fight 
with one another, laughing all the while. 

18. Vrikodara (Bhima) easily defeated 
those one hundred and one (Dhritarashtra’s) 
sons of great energy, as if they were but one 
instead of one hundred and one. 

19. He seized them by the hair, and 
throwing them down, he dragged them along 
the ground; some breaking their knees, 
some their heads and some their shoulders. 

20. When playing in the water, he sometimes seized ten of them by his arms and 
drowned them in the water. He left them 
off only^when they were almost dead. 

21. When they got upon a tree to gather 
fruits, Bhima shook the tree by striking it 
with his feet. 

22. Being shaken and whirled by that 
shock, down came with all speed the princes 
with the fruits. 

23. In speed, in pugilistic encounters, or 
in speed, the princes could not excel Bhima 
in any way. 

24. Bhima thus prided himself by 
tormenting the sons of Dhritarashtra out of 
boyish pranks. In fact he had no ill-will 
towards them. 

25. Seeing these extraordinary
exhibitions of strength by Bhima, the mighty 
armed eldest son of Dhritarashtra 
(Duryodhana) conceived hostility towards him. 

26. The wicked and unrighteous 
(Duryodhana), through ignorance and ambition (of 
possessing wealth), inclined to commit acts 
of sin. 

27. (He thought), the son of Kunti, this 
Vrikodara (Bhima), this second Pandava, is 
the foremost in strength. I must destroy him 
by artifice, 

28. The greatly strong and powerful 
Bhima challenges one hundred of us in 
pride. 

29—30. therefore, when he will be asleep 
in the gardens of the palace, we shall throw 
him into the Ganges. Afterwards confining 
his eldest brother Yudhishthira and his 
younger brother (Arjuna), I shall reign sole 
king over the earth.” Duryodhana, having 
determined to do this wicked act, watched 
for an opportunity to injure Bhima. 

31. O descendant of Bharata, he built for 
the purpose of water-sport an extraordinary 
and beatiful palace 

32. With many rooms filled with all 
sorts of luxuries, decorated with hangings of 
broad cloth and with banners flying from 
its top. 

33. O descendant of Bharata, its name 
was "Water-sport house" and it was 
situated in the country named Pramanakota. 

34. The cooks, expert in wicked acts, 
kept there ready various kinds of viands 
(drinkable, lickable, chewable eand suckable). 

35. When all was ready, they gave information 
to the son of Dhritarashtra (Duryodhana). 
Thereupon the wicked-minded 
Duryodhana said to the Pandavas, 

36. Let us all brothers go to the banks 
of the Ganges, adorned with gardens and 
woods, there to sport in the water. 

37-38. Yudhishthira replied by saying, 
“Let it be so.” The Kurus with the Pandavas 
mounted on cars resembling cities and 
on excellent native elephants, left the town. 
An-iving at that garden and wood, they  
dismissed their attendants. 

39. They surveyed the beauty of the 
garden and the wood ; and then those heroes, 
all the brothers,—entered the palace as lions 
enter the mountain caves. 

40. On entering the palace they saw 
that its windows looked very graceful; and 
its artificial water-fountains were splendid.

4. The architects had handsomely 
plastered the walls and the cielings and the 
painters had painted them beautifully. 
Phere were tanks of pure water in which 
blossomed thousands of lotuses. 

42. Their banks were decked with various 
flowers whose fragrance filled the  
atmosphere and the grounds were all over 
covered with the season flowers. 

43 - On entering the palace, all the Kurus 
and the Pandavas sat down and began to 
enjoy the luxurious things provided for 
them. 

44. They then began to play and exhange 
morsels of food with one another. 

45. The wicked Duryodhana had mixed 
some virulent poison with the food of Bhimsena 
with the desire of making away with 
him. 

46. That wicked youth, whose heart was a 
razor, but whose tongue was ambrosia, 
rose like a (loving) brother and friend. 

47. The wicked man himself fed (Bhima) 
with a large quantity of it. Bhima too 
ate it, knowing that there was nothing 
wrong . 

48. Thereupon Duryodhana felt himself 
very happy in his mind ; that worst of men 
thought that he had compassed his 
end. 

49. They then, all the Pandavas and the 
Kurus, were joyfully engaged in sporting 
in the water. 

50—52. At the end of the sport, they 
dressed themselves with white garments ana 
decked themselves with various ornaments. 
In the evening the heroes, the supporters of 
the Kuru honour, felt themselves fatigued 
from the sport in the water and they resolved 
to rest in the pleasure house. Having 
made others exercise in the water; the 
powerful Bhima felt himself very much tired, 
and occupying a large space he lay down on 
the ground. 

53. He was fatigued and he was under 
the influence of the poison. The cool air 
spread the poison all over his body and the 
son of Pandu (Bhima) became senseless. 

54. Duryodhana then himself bound 
Bhima with the cords of creepers, and he 
then pushed from the land that dead-like 
hero into the water. 

55. The senseless Pandava (Bhima) sunk 
into the water and fell on the Naga boys in 
the abode of the Nagas. 

56. Thereupon, thousands of Nagas, 
endued with virulently poisonous fangs, 
began to bit Bhima. 

57. Having been thus bitten, the virulent 
vegetable poison in his body was neutralised 
by the snake-poison. 

58. The serpents had bitten all over his 
body except his chest, the skin of which 
was so tough that their fangs could not 
penetrate it. 

59—60. The son of Kunti (Bhima), 
having regained his consciousness, burst 
open the cords, and he then pressed them 
(snakes) all under the ground. Some fled in 
fear and the rest, that escaped death from 
Bhima’s hands, went and spoke to Vasuki, 
the king of the snakes, equal to Indra. 

61. “O king of the snakes, a certatn 
man, bound with the cords of creepers, 
sank into water. Perhaps he drank poison, 
for he was insensible. 

62. Finding him insensible, we began to 
bite him, but he soon regained his senses 
and burst open the cords. 

63. He then began to press us to 
the ground. You should inquire who is 
this greatly powerful man. Thereupon, 
Vasuki asked by the inferior Nagas, went 
there, 

64—65. And saw mighty-armed Bhima 
bf fearful deeds. There was a chief of the 
snakes, named Arka; he was the grandfather 
of the father of Pritha (Kunti) ; he saw the 
grandson of his grandson and embraced 
im. The greatly illustrious Vasuki was 
much pleased. 

66. The king of the snakes said, "What 
should we do to please him ? Let him be 
given gems and wealth in profusion."

67. Having been thus addressed, the 
Naga (Arka) thus replied to Vasuki, “O 
king of the snakes, when you are pleased 
with him, he requires no amassing of 
wealth. 

68. When you are pleased, let this greatly 
powerful prince drink (of the vessel of 
Kasha (ambrosia), in which vessel there is 
the strength of one thousand elephants, 

69. Let this prince drink of it as much as 
he can.” Vasuki replied to the Naga (Arka) 
"Be it so." 

70. Thereupon, purifying himself
carefully, the Pandava Bhima sat facing the east 
and began to drink the Kasha. The Nagas 
performed auspicious rites. 

71. At one breath that powerful man 
(Bhima) quaffed off a whole vessel ; thus 
(one after the other) that son of Pandu 
quaffed off eight successive jars. 

72. Thereupon, that chastiser of foes, 
that mighty-armed Bhimasena lay down in 
happiness on a celestial bed given by the 
Nagas. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty eighth 
Section , Bhima s drinking of Ambrosia , in 
the Sambhava of the Adi Barva. 


Section 129

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Here the Pandavas and the Kurus, 
after finishing their sports and pleasure, 
returned to Hastinapur without Bhima, 

2. Some on horses, some on elephant 
and some preferring cars and other 
conveyances. They said, “Bhima must have 
gone before us.” 

3. The wicked Duryodhana was glad 
not to see Bhima ; and we entered the city 
with his brothers (in joy). 

4. The virtuous-minded Yudhishthira 
himself being unacquanited with vice and 
wickedness considered others to be as honest 
as he himself was. 

5. The son of Pritha, (Yudhishthira), full 
of filial love, went to his mother, Kunti, and, 
making obeisance to her he said,—“Has 
Bhima come here ? 

6. O good mother, I do not see him here 
Where has he gone ? We sought for him 
long in the gardens and the woods. 

7. But we did not find Vrikodara 
any where. We thought in our mind that 
he had preceded us. 

8. O illustrious lady, we have come here, 
our hearts being in great anxiety. Coming 
here, where has he gone ? Have you sent 
him any where? 

9. O illustrious lady, O great one, tell 
me, I am full of doubts respecting the mighty 
hero, Bhima. 

10. He was asleep, and he has not come, 
I believe Bhima is killed.’ I Having been 
thus addressed by the intelligent son of 
Dharma (Yudhishthira), Kunti 

11. Cried out “ Alas! alas! ” She then 
said to Yudhishthira in alarm, “ O son, I have 
not seen Bhima; he has not come to me. 

12. Go soon with your brothers and 
make a careful search for him.” Having 
said this in sorrowful heart to her eldest son, 

13. Kunti summoned Khatwa (Vidura) 
and spoke to him thus, “ O illustrious 
Khatwa, I do not see Bhimasena. Where is 
he gone! 

14. The others with all their brothers 
have returned from the gardens; only 
my mighty-armed Bhima has not come. 

15. He is always in the evil look of 
Duryodhana. The Kurus are all wicked, 
narrow-minded, covetuous for sovereignty 
and impudent. 

16. They might have killed him in 
anger. Therfore, my mind is afflicted with 
anxiety, and my heart burns. 

Vidura said 

17. O blessed lady, do not say so. 
Protect the others (your sons) from the Kurus. 
If abused, the wicked-minded (Duryodhana) 
may kill the rest (of your sons), 

18. The great Rishi said that your sons 
would be long-lived. (therefore) that son 
(Bhima) will surely return and gladden your 
heart. 

Vaishampayan said 

19. Having said this, the learned Vidura 
went (back) to his house. Kunti with her 
sons lived in her house in (great) anxiety. 

20. The Pandava (Bhima) awoke from 
his sleep on the eighth day, and he felt 
himself strong beyond measure by digesting that 
Rasha (ambrosia). 

21. Seeing the Pandava (Bhima) awake, 
the snakes consoled and cheered him, and 
they spoke to him thus, 

22. “O mighty-armed hero, the strength 
giving Rasha (liquor) which you have drunk 
will give you the strength of ten thousand 
elephants, and you will be invincible in 
battle. 

23. O best of the Kuru race, bathe in 
this sacred and auspicious water and return 
home. Your brothers are disconsolate for 
your absence. 

24—26. Thereupon the mighty-armed 
(hero) became purified by a bath and decked 
himself with white garments and with white 
flowery garlands. He ate the Paramanya 
offered to him by the powerful Nagas. 
Then being adored and blessed by the 
Naga-hero, the Pandava (Bhima), decked 
with various celestial ornaments, rose from 
the nether regions. 

27—28. That chastiser of foes (Bhima) 
rose from the abode of the Nagas in 
delightful heart. The lotus-eyed (hero), being 
upraised by the Nagas from the water, 
was placed in the self same gardens, where 
he had been sporting. They then vanished 
in his own sight. 

29. The powerful Bhima, the son of 
Kunti, being thus arisen, ran to his mother 
with all speed. 

30. Saluting her and his eldest brother, 
that chastiser of foes smelt the heads of 
his younger brothers. 

31. He was embraced by his mother 
and by every one of those best of men. 
In filial love for one another they then 
exclaimed, "What joy ! What great joy !"  

32. Every thing about the villany of 
Duryodhana was told to his btothers by the 
greatly powerful Bhima. 

33. The Pandava (Bhima) told them 
in detail all about the lucky and unlucky 
Incidents that befell him in the region of the 
Nagas. 

34. Thereupon, king Yudhishthira spoke to 
Bhima these words of great import, Keep 
your silence. Do not speak it out to any 
one in any way. 

35. O sons of Kunti, you should protect 
one another with great care from this day.” 
Having said this, the mighty-armed Dharmaraja 
Yudhishthira, 

36. With all his brothers, became very 
vigilent from that day. And the virtuous 
minded Vidura gave the sons of Pritha (the 
Pandavas) good counsels. 

37. Some time after, Duryodhana again 
mixed (with Bhima’s food) poison which 
was fresh, virulent, fearful, hair-stirring and 
deadly. 

38. The son of the Vaisya woman (their 
cousin Yuyutsu), being desirous of doing 
good to the sons of Pritha, informed them 
of it; but Vrikodara (Bhima) ate it and 
digested it. 

39. Though that poison was greatly 
virulent, though it was intended for killing 
Bhima, it produced no effects on Bhima ; 
he digested it. 

40. Thereupon, Duryodhana, Karna, and 
the son of Suvala (Shakuni) adopted numerous 
other means to kill that Pandava (Bhima). 

41. The Pandavas, though they were 
aware of all this, did express no indignation 
as advised by Vidura. 

thus ends the hundred and twenty-ninth 
Section , the return of Bhima , in the 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 
***

Section 130

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Janamejaya said 

1. O Brahmana, you should relate to m£ 
the account of the birth of Kripa. How did 
he spring from a clump of heath ? Whence 
did he obtain his weapons ? 

Vaishampayana said 

2. O great king, the great Rishi Gotama 
had a son) named Saradwata. This son of 
Gotama was born with arrows. 

3. O chastiser of foes, he had not as 
much aptitude for the study of the Vedas, 
as he had for the Study of the science of 
weapons. 

4. As Btamhacharis acquire knowledge 
by austerities, so he acquired all his weapons 
by austerities. 

5. That soil Of Gotama frightened thd 
king of the Celestials by his aptitfcde for the 
science of weapdns and austerities: 

6. O descendant of Kuru, the kihjj of 
the celestials summoned a celestial maid 



i S6 


MAHABHARATA 


named Janapadi and told her, " Destroy the 
penances {pi Saradwata). 

7. She went to the charming hermitage 
of Saradwata ; and that damsel began there 
to tempt the son of Gotama (sitting) 
with bows and arrows 

8. Seeing that Apsara of matchless 
beauty on earth clad in a single doth (roam¬ 
ing) alone in that wood, Gotama’s eyes danc¬ 
ed in delight. 

g. Seeing her, his body shook all over 
with emotion, and his bow and arrows slipped 
from his hands and fell on the ground. 

10. But he was possessed of ascetic for¬ 
titude and strength pf soul. The Rishi 
mastered patience to withstand the tempta¬ 
tion. 

11. But O king, his sudden mental 
agitation caused an unconscious emission of 
his vital fluid. 

12. Leaving his bow and deer skin, 
the Rishi escaped from the Apsara and 
left the hermitage. His vital fluid fell upon 
a clump of heath, 

13. And having fallen on it, it was divided 
into tvsfo parts, whence sprang two children 
that were twins. 

14. A soldier in attendance upon the 
king Santami, wandering in the forest in 
hunting, saw them. 

15. Seeing the bow, arrows and the deer 
skin, he thought they might be the sons of 
a Brahmana proficient in the science of 
arms. 

16. He took up those children along 
with the- bow and arrows and showed the 
king what he had found. The king was 
filled with pity to see the twins. 

17—18. He took them home saying, 
u \jct them be my children." The best of 
men, bringing that twins Goutamas home, 
performed the usual rites, and they (too) 
t>egan to grow up, and Gotama also, 
leaving (his old hermitage), studied the 
science of weapons. 

19. That king gave them the name of 
Kripa and Kripi, because they were reared 
up by him out of kindness. 

20. Gotama came to know through his 
spiritual sight where they (his son and 
daughter) were. He came there and re¬ 
presented every thing about his lineage. 

21. He taught him (Kripa) the four 
branches of the science of arms, various 
other branches of science, including all their 
mysteries and details. 

22—23. He (Kripa) soon became a great 
professor (of the science of arms), and the 
great car-warriors, the sons of Dhritarashtra, 


the Pandavas, the Yadavas and the Vrism, 
and many other princes came to him and 
received from him lessons in the science of 
arms. 

thus ends the hundred and thirtieth 
chapter, the birth of Kripa, in the Sham- 
bhava of the Adi Par va, 

Section CXXXL 

(SAMBHAVA PARV A) ^-Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Being desirous of giving his grand¬ 
sons a superior education, Borenra was in 
search of a preceptor, who was endued with 
energy and who was well-skilled in the 
science of arras. 

2—4. O best of the Bharata race, decid¬ 
ing that none who was not possessed of 
great intelligence, who was not illustrious, 
who was not a perfect master of the science 
of arms, who was not as powerful as the 
celestials, shall be the preceptor of the 
Kurus, the son of Ganga (Bhishma), placed 
the Pandavas and the Kurus under the 
tuition of the son of Bbaradwaja, the wise 
Drona, learned in all the Vedas. Having 
been honoured according to the proper form 
by the illustrious Bhishma, 

5. That foremost of all men skilled in 
arms, that illustrious man (Drona) was 
pleased with the reception given to him by 
great Bhishma and accepted them as his 
pupils. 

6. Drona taught them the science of 
arms in all its branches. O king, the 
immeasurably ’powerful Pandavas and the 
Kurus became within a very short time 
experts in the use of all kinds of weapons. 

Janamejaya said 

7. O Brahmana, how was Drona born? 
How and whence did he acquire his armsf 
How and why he came to the Kurus? 
Whose son was that powerful man ? 

8. How was {born his son Ashwathama, 
the foremost of all skilled in arms? 1 
wish to hear all this. Narrate them in 
detail. 

Vaishampayana said 

Q. There lived at the source of the 
Ganges a great and high-souled Rishi who 
was known as Bharadwaja, and he was 
always observing rigid vows. 

10. In the time of yore, Rishi Bha¬ 
radwaja one day, intending to perform 
Agnihotra , went with many other great 
Rishis to the Ganges to perform ablu¬ 
tions. 


ADI PARVA. 


187 


11. The Rishi saw Ghritachi herself,— 
the Apsafa, young and beautiful, proud and 
voluptuous,—rising from the water. 

12. As she rose, her cloth became loose 
and disordered. Seeing her doth dis¬ 
ordered, the Rishi became full of desire. 

13. The mind of the wise Bharadwaja 
was attracted to her and his vital fluid was 
dropped. But he held it in a drona ( a 
vessel). 

14. Thereupon, the wise Drona was born 
in dial vessel. He studied all the Vedas 
and Vedangas. 

15. The foremost of all weildecs of arms, 
the greatly powerful Bharadwaja bestowed 
on die illustrious Agnivisha the weapon, 
called Agneya, 

16. O best of the Bharata race, the 
Rishi, born of fire, gave that great fire, 
weapon to the son of Bharadwaja (Drona), 

17. Bharadwaja had a friend, named 
Prishata who was a king. He had a son, 
born to him, named Drupada. 

18. That best of Kshatriyas, that prince 
(Drupada) went every day to his (Bhara- 
dwaja’s) hermitage and played and studied 
with Drona. 

19. O king, when Prishata died, this 
mighty-armed Drupada became the king 
of the Northern Panchalas. 

20. The illustrious Bharadwaja also (at 
this time) ascended heaven; thereupon, 
Drona continued to dwell (in the hermitage) 
engaged in ascetic austerities. 

21—22. Being well-versed in the Vedas 
and Vedangas, and having burnt all his sins 
by asceticism, the greatly illustrious Drona, 
obedient to the injunctions of his father and 
moved by the desire of offspring, married 
Kript, the daughter .of Saradwata, ever 
engaged in Agnihotra, in piety and in 
penances. 

23. The daughter of Gotama obtained 
a son, named Ashwathama; as soon as he 
was born, he neighed like the horse Uchai- 
srava. 

24. Hearing this, an invisible being m the 
skies said, “ As the voice of this child was 
like that of a horse and as it has been heard 
over a great distance, 

25. He will be known by the name of 
Ashwathama, (the horse voiced)- The son 
of Bharadwaja was exceedingly glad by 
obtaining the son. 

26—27. He continued to live there de¬ 
voting himself to the study of the science 
of arms. He heard of that slayer of foes, 
that high-souled son of Jamadagni, that 
Brahmana, who was the foremost of all 


weilders of arms, and who was versed in all 
kinds of knowledge. O king, he (Jama¬ 
dagni) had expressed his desire of giving 
away all his wealth to the Brahmanas. 

28. Having heard of Parashurama’s 
knowledge of arms and of his celestial 
weapons, and of his morality, he (Drona) 
set his heart upon them. 

29. Thereupon, the mighty-armed and 

f ready ascetic (Drona,) accompanied by his 
iscipfes who were all devoted to vows and 
asceticism, started for the Mohendra moun¬ 
tain. 

30. On arriving at the Mohendra (moun¬ 
tain) the son of Bharadwaja, the great 
ascetic, saw the son of Bhrigu, who was 
self-controlled, who was of great patience 
and who was the exterminator of his 
foes. 

31. Then approaching with his disciples 
to the descendant of Brigu, Drona told 
him his name and that he was born in the 
race of Angirasha. 

32—33. Touching the ground with his 
head, he worshipped his (Parashurama’s) 
feet. Seeing that the illustrious son of 
Jamadagni determined upon retiring into 
the forest after giving away all his wealth, 
the son of Bharadwaja (Drona) said, “ I 
am born of Bharadwaja, but I am not born 
in any woman's womb. 

34. Know me to be an excellent Brah¬ 
mana by name Drona, I have come to 
you with the desire of obtaining your wealth.” 
The destroyer of all the Kshatriyas, that 
high-souled (P&rusharama) thus replied to 
him. 

35 —" O best of the twice born, you 
are welcome. Tell me what you desire.’ 1 
Having been thus addressed by (Parashu) 
Rama, the son of Bharadwaja (Drona) said 
to that foremost of all smiters, Rama, who 
was desirous of giving away all his wealth, 
“ O (Rishi) of multifarious vows, I ask 
your eternal wealth , M 

Hlf ym ft . said — 

37. O ascetic, whatever gold and other 
wealth I had, I have already given them 
away to the Brahmanas. 

38. This lady Earth, bounded by the sea 
and adorned with the garlands of towns and 
cities, I have given away to Kashyapa. 

39 ! have now left only my body and 
my valuable and various weapons and arms. 

40. I am prepared to give you either my 
body or my weapons; O Drona, tell me 
without delay what you tike to have, 1 shall 
give it to you, 



mahabharata. 


Drona said 

41. O descendant of Brigu, you should 
give me all your arms and weapons, together 
with the mysterious knowledge of hurling 
and recalling them. 

Vaishampayana said •— 

42. Saying “Be it so,” the descendant of 
Brigu gave away all his weapons to him 
(Drona) with the whole science of arms with 
its rules and regulations. 

43. That excellent Brahmana (Drona), 
after receiving all of them and considering 
himself amply rewarded, went to (the 
country of) his friend Drupada in a delight¬ 
ful heart. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty first 
chapter, the colaquy of Drona and Varga,va, 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 


Section CXXXH. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O king, thereupon the mighty son 
of Bharadwaja (Drona), coming before 
Drupada, told that monarch, “ Consider me 
as friend.” 

2. Having been thus joyfully addressed 
by his friend, the son of Bharadwaja 
(Drona), the king of Panchala could not 
bear those words. 

3. The king, intoxicated with the pride 
of wealth, contracted his brows in anger, 
and with eyes red (in wrath) he spoke 

Drona thus 

4. “ O Brahmana, your intelligence 
is hardly of high order. You address 
me all on a sudden as your friend. 

5. O dull-minded man, great kings 
can never be friends with such luckless 
and indigent fellow as you. 

6. We had friendship between us 
when we were both equally circumstan¬ 
ced ; but Time, that wears out every 
thing, wears out friendship also. 

7. Friendship never remains In any 
one’s heart in this world without being 
worn out. Time wears it out and anger 
also destroys it. 

8 . Do not therefore stick to our worn-out 
friendship. Do not think of it any longer. 
O best of Brahmanas, the friendship I enter¬ 
tained for you was for a particular purpose, 

9—10. The poor cannot be the friend of 
the rich, the unlearned can not be the 
friend of thd learned ; the coward can 
IK?t the friend of the brave (heroes). 


How then do you desire the continuance 
of our old friendship ! Friendship or enmity, 
exists between two persons equally sit ua te d 
as to wealth or prowess. The poor and 
the rich can neither be friends nor enemies 
of each other. 

11. One of pure birth can never be a 
friend of one, wno is lowly born \ a car-war¬ 
rior cannot be a friend of one, who is not 
a car-warrior. One who is not a king can¬ 
not have a king for his friend. How then 
do yob desire the continuance of our old 
friendship V 

12. thus addressed by Drupada, the 
powerful son of Bharadwaja, was fined with 
anger, and reflecting for a moment, 

13. That wise man made up his mind 
as to his course of action with regard to the 
king of Panchala. He then went to the city 
of the foremost of the Kurus, named Hastina- 
pur. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty second 
Section , the coloquy between Drona and 
Drupada in the Sambhava of the Adi 
Parva. 


Section CXXXIII. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Arrived at Hastinapur, thfe excellent 
Brahmana, the son of Bharadwaja, (Dmna\ 
lived in privacy in the house of the son of 
Gotama (Kripa). 

2. His lorldly son, at the intervals of 
Kripa’s teachings, gave instructions to the 
sons of Pritha (Pandavas) on the use of 
arms. But none knew as yet Ashwathama's 
(real) prowess. 

3. thus he (Drona) lived there in pri¬ 
vacy for sometime, when one day the (Kuru) 
princeis all in a company came out of the 
city of Hastinapur. 

4. The princes began to play with a ball, 
and when they were thus there playing, the 
ball Tell into a well. 

5. Thereupon, they tried their utmost to 
recover the ball (from the well). But with 
all their efforts they could hot get up the 
ball. 

6. Then they stared at one-another, their 

faces flushed with blushes of sbamc. They 
were filled with great anxiety finding no 
means of recovering it. .. • 

7. They then saw near them a Brahmana 
of darkish colour,—decrepit and Ifean.—one 
who had performed his Sundhb and puri 
fied hiirtself with Agnihotra. 


ADI 

"8. Seeing that illustrious (Brahmana), 
the princes, who were despaired of the 
ball, immediately surrounded him. 

q. The powerful Drona, seeing the 
princes unsuccesfu! in their attempts, 
smiled a little, and being conscious of his 
own skill, he said, 

10. “Shame on your Kshatriya prowess 
and shame also on your skill in arms! 
Being born in the race of Bharata, how is 
it that you can not recover the ball! 

11. If you give me a dinner, I shall with 
these blades of grass bring up not only the 
ball you have lost, but also this ring which 
I now throw down.” 

12- Having said this, that chastiser of 
foes, Drond, took off his ring ahd threw 
it into that dry well. Thereupon, the son of 
Kunti, Yudhishthira, spoke to Drona thus; 

YucfiurtMra said:— 

13. O Brahmana, ask from us with the 
permission of Kripd that which would last 
you for life. 

Vaiahampay ana said 

Having been thus addressed, (Drona) 
smilingly replied to the princes, 

Drona said:— 

14. I shall by my Mantras invest this 
handful of Ishikas (long grass) with the 
virtues of weapons. Behold their virtues 
that no other weapons possess. 

15. I shall pierce the ball with one of 
these blades, and then pierce that blade 
wjth another and that another with a third, 
and thus making a chain, I shall bring 
it up. 

Vaishampayana said 

16. Then Drona did exactly what he had 
said. The princes were all amazed and 
their eyes expanded with delight. Regard¬ 
ing what they saw as very extraordinary, 
they said, 

17. “O best of the twice born, raise up 
the ring without delay. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

18. Then the greatly illustrious Drona, 
taking a bow with an arrow pierced the ring 
with it and brought it up. 

19. Raising up from the well that ring, 
pierced with the arrow, he gave it to the 
astonished princes. Then prpices too, see¬ 
ing the ring thus recovered, said, 

The princes said =— 

20. O Brahmana, we bow to you. No 
Qn$ else possesses such skill. We egarly 


PARVA. 189 

desire to know who you are, and what we 
can do for you.” 

21. Having been thus addressed, Drona 
spoke thus to the princes. 

Drona said 

22. Go to Bhishma and describe to him 
my likeness and skill. That greatly powerful 
man wiH be able to recognise me. 

Vaishampayana said 

23. Saying u Be it so,” the princes 
went to Bhishma and told him all that the 
Brahmana had said and done. 

' 24. Hearing from the princes every¬ 
thing, Bhishma (at once) recognised Drona 
and thought that he would be the best 
preceptor (for the princes.) 

25. That foremost of all wielders of 
weapons, Bhishma, went to him in person, 
and welcomming him respectfully, brought 
him over to the palace, and asked him the 
reason of his arrival. Thereupon Drona 
told him all. 

Drona said:— 

26. Being desirous of learning the 
science of arms, I formerly went to the 
great Rishi Agnivishafor obtaining weapons 
from him. 

27. I was engaged there in serving my 
preceptor and lived (with him) for a long 
time as an humble-minded Brahma- 
chan with matted locks on my head. 

28. The prince of Panchala, the greatly 
powerful Jagmasena also lived there with 
the same motive (as that of mine). 

29. There he became my friend, and he 
always sought my welfare. He was beloved 
to me. O lord, he lived with me for many 
years. 

30. O descendant of Kuru, we had 
studied together from our earliest days; 
he was my friend from boyhood; he always 
spoke and did what. was agreeable to 
me. 

31. O Bhishma, he used to tell me these 
gratifyiog words, “O Drona, I am the fa¬ 
vourite son of my illustrious father. 

32. When my father (the king) would 
install me as the ruler of the Panchalas, 
it (the kingdom) shall be then enjoyed by 
you. O friend, this is my solemn promise. 

33. My kingdom, my wealth, my happi¬ 
ness all will be at your disposal.” W hen 
his study of the science of arms was finished, 
he went away after being duly worshipped 
by me. 

34 —3^- I kept his .words always in my 
mind. Some time after, in obediepce to the 


MAHABHARATA. 


190 

injunction of my father and in the tempta 
lion of begetting offspring, I married the 
illustrious daughter of Gotama (Kripi) who 
had short hair, who possessed great intelli¬ 
gence and observed many rigid vows, and 
who was ever engaged in the Agnihotra, 
sacrifices and austerities. She gave birth to 
a son, named Ashwathama, who was greatly 
powerful and as effulgent as the sun. 

37—39 As Bharadwaja was pleased on 
obtaining me, so 1 was pleased on getting 
that son. One day Ashwathama began to 
cry on seeing some richmen’s sons drink 
milk. 4 was so beside myself at this that I 
lost all knowledge of the points of heaven. 
“ Instead of asking him who had only a few 
kine, just sufficient for sacrificial purposes, 
I shall ask him who had many,'—thinking 
thus in my mind, O son of Ganga, 1 roamed 
over many countries; 

40. though I roved all over the country, 
yet I could not obtain a milch-cow, and 1 
returned unsuccessful. Thereupon some 
boys tempted him with Pistaudaka (water 
mixed with powdered rice.) 

41. The child, drinking the Pistaudaka 
cried out, “O I have drunk milk.” O des¬ 
cendant of Kuru, he began to dance in joy, 
being [thus deluded by his childish igno¬ 
rance. 

42. Seeing him dance with joy amidst 
his playmates who were smiling at his sim¬ 
plicity, 1 was exceedingly touched. 

43. “Fie to the poor Drona, who does 
not tiy to earn wealth ! His son in the thirst 
for milk drinks Pistaudaka ; 

44. In ignorance he dances, crying “I 
have drunk milk." Hearing these derisive 
words, I was quite beside myself ! 

45 — 47  Then reproaching myself by 
myself, I began to reflect thus in my mind, 
“ Cast off and censured by Brahmanas, I 
would not yet, from the desire of wealth, be 
any body’s servant, which is ever sinful.” 
O Bhishma, thus resolved, and remembering 
my former friendship for him, (Drupada) I 
regarded myself very much blessed. I went 
joyfully to the Shoumaka, taking my beloved 
son and wife with me. 

48. I joyfully heard that my beloved 
friend had been installed on the throne, and, 
remembered his words and companionship. 

49' O lord, I went to Drupada remem¬ 
bering my old. friendship, and said to him 
“O best of men, know me as your friend.” 

50. I went to Drupada confidently as a 
friend should do. But Drupada, laughing 
in derision, cast me off as if I were, a vulgar 
fellow ; ancPhe said, 


5«. ” O Brahmana, your intelligence is 
hardly ol high order. As coming to me on 
a sudden you 9ay you are my friend. 

52. O dull-minded man, great kings can 
never be friends with such luckless and 
indigent fellow like you. 

53. We had friendship between us when 
we were both equally circumstanced, but 
Time that wears out every thing, wears out 
friendship also. 

54. Friendship never re ma i ns In the 
world in any one’s heart without bang 
worn out. Time wears it out and anger also 
destroys it. 

55. Do not, therefore, stick to that worn- 
out friendship. Do not think of It any 
longer. O best of Brahmanas, the friend¬ 
ship I entertained for you was for a parti¬ 
cular purpose. 

56. The poor cannot be the friend of the 
rich ; the unlearned can not be the friend of 
the learned ; the coward cannot be the friend 
of the brave (heroes). How then do you 
desire the continuance of our old friendship 7 

57. There may be either; friendship or 
enmity between two persons equally situat¬ 
ed as to wealth or prowess. The poor and 
the rich can neither be friends nor enemies 
of one another. 

58. One of pure birth can never be a 
friend of one who is lowly born ; a car- 
warrior can not be a friend of one who is not 
a car-warrior ; one who is not a king can not 
have a king for his friend. 

59. I do not know you, I do not remem¬ 
ber that I ever promised you my king¬ 
dom. O Brahmana, I can give you food 
and shelter for one night.” 

60. Having been thus addressed,I left his 
presence with my wife, vowing to do that 
which 1 shall certainly do without much 
delay. 

61. O Bhishma, thus insulted by Dm- 
pada I was filled with wrath. I have come 
to the Kurus wishing to obtain accomplished 
pupils. 

62. To act according to your wishes, I 
now come to Hastinapur. Tell me what I 
am to do. 

Vaishampayana saids— 

63. Having been thus addressed, Bhishma 
thus spoke to the son of Bharadwaja. 

Bhishma said 

64. Urtstring your bow, and teach (these 
princes) the science of arras. Enjoy joyfully 
as much as you like every luxury in the 
Kuru abode. 



Adi parva. 


9i 


65. Whatever wealth, kingdom and 
sovereignty the Kurus possess, you are the 
lord of all. All the kurus are at your 
command. 

66. O Brahmana, consider that to be 
already accomplished which is in your heart. 
O best of the twice-born, as the fruit of our 
good luck we have obtained you. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty-third 
Section , the coloquy of Bhishma and Drona, 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXXXIV. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA )—Continued. 

Vaishampay&na said 

1. Thereupon that best of men, that great¬ 
ly effulgent Drona, worshipped by Bhishma, 
took up his quarters in the house 
of the Kurus and was adored by them 
all. 

2. When he had taken rest for a while, 
Bhishma, taking his grandsons, the Kurus, 
gave them to him as his pupils, making him 
their preceptor with the presents of various 
wealth. 

3. That lord (Bhishma) gave the son of 
Bharadwaja (Drona) a neat and tidy house, 
well-filled with paddy and every kind of 
wealth. 

4. That great bowman, Drona, in 
delightful heart, accepted the Kurus, the 
sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu, as his 
pupils. 

5. Having accepted them all as (his 
pupils), Drona called them apart and spoke, 
to them confidently thus, 

6. 41 0 sinless ones, I have a particular 
desire in my heart , promise me truly that 

will accomplish it when you will 
me skilled in arms. 

Vaishampayana said 

7. Hearing these words, the Kuru prin¬ 
ces remained silent. O chastiser of foes, 
Arjuna, (however), vowed to accomplish it. 

8. Drona then cheerfully clasped Arjuna 
to his bosom and repeatedly took thescent of 
his head and shed tears of joy. 

9 The greatly powerful Drona taught 
the sons of Pandu (the use of) various 
weapons,—both celestial and human. 

10. O best of the Bharata race, many 
other princes also flocked to that best of 
Brahmanas, Drona, to learn (the science 
of) arms. 

11. The Vrisnis, the Andhakas, and the 
princes from various countries, and the son 
of Suta and Radha (Karna) made Drona 
their preceptor. 

12. The son of Suta (Karna), being jeal¬ 
ous of Partha (Arjuna), always defied nim, 
and being supported by Duryodhana dis¬ 
regarded the Pandavas. 

13—15, That Pandava (Arjuna) from his 
eager desire to learn the science of arms 
always remained at the side of Drona, and 
he excelled all in skill, in strength of 
arms, and in perseverence, on account of 
his love for the science of arms. though 
he (Drona) gave equal instructions to all, 
yet Arjuna became the foremost of all in 
lightness and skill. Drona was convinced 
that none of his pupils would be able to 
equal that son of Indra. 

16. thus he gave instructions to all the 
princes in the (science of) arms. To keep 
them away for long, he gave them Kamun- 
dala (a vessel of narrow mouth) for fetching 
water. 

17—19. But he gave his son a Kumbha 
(wide mouthed vessel to fetch water), so 
that it may not take him, long (to fill it). 
When they were thus kept away, Drona 
instructed nis son some superior methods of 
using \ arms. Arjuna came to know it. 
Thereupon he filled his Kumundala with 
the Xaruna weapon and came to his 
preceptor at the same time with his precep¬ 
tor’s son, and thus the intelligent son of 
Pritha, that foremost of all the learned in 
arms, became in no way inferior, to his 
preceptor's son. 

26. Arjuna took great deal of care in 
worshipping the preceptor; he had great 
devotion to his study of the science of 
arms, therefore, he became a great favourite 
of Drona. 

21. Drona, seeing Falguni's (Arjuna) 
great devotion to arms, summoned the cook 
and told him in private, 

22. 44 Never give rice (food) to Arjuna 
in the dark, and never told him also that 
I have asked you to do it.” 

23. On a certain day when Arjuna was 
taking his food, a wind arose and the burn¬ 
ing lamp went out. 

24. The effulgent son of Kunti, (Arjuna) 
continued eating in the dark, his hand from 
habit going to nis mouth. 

25. Thinking this to be the result of the 
force of habit, the mighty-armed son of 
Pandu practised with his bow in the night. 

26. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
bearing the twang of his bow-string, in the 
night, Drona came to him, and embracing 
him spoke to him thus, 




MAHAflHAftAtA. 


' 10$ 


Drona said 

27. I speak to you ruly that I shall do 
to you that by which there will be no bowman 
in the world who will be equal to you. 

Vaishaxnpayana said 

38. Thereupon Drona taught Arjuna 
the art of fighting on horse back and on 
the back of the elephants on car and on the 
ground. 

29. Drona taught that Katirava (Arjuna) 
how to fight with clubs, the sword, the lance, 
the spear and the dart. He taught him 
the use of many other weapons, and how 
to fight with many men. 

30. Hearing of his skill, thousands of 
kings and princes, desirous of learning the 
science of arms, flocked (to him). 

31. O great king, thereupon, Gkalavya, 
the son of Hiranyadhanus, king of the 
Nishadas, came to Drona. 

32. That learned man in all the precepts 
of religion (Drona) did .not^ accept him 
(the Nishada prince) as his pupil in 
archery, thinking that he was a Nishada 
and considering the interest of the princes. 

33. O chastiser of foes, touching Drona’s 
feet with his head, he went into a forest and 
made a clay statue of Drona. 

34. He began to worship it (the clay 
figure) as if it were his real preceptor, and 
before that figure he practised the use of 
arms with the most rigid regularity. 

35. In consequence of his exceptional 
reverence for his preceptor and of his 
devotion to his purpose, all the three 
processes ol fixing arrows on the bow-string, 
aiming and letting off became very easy to 
him. 

36. O chastiser of foes, One day the 
Kuru and the Pandava princes with the per¬ 
mission of Drona all set out on their cars 
to a hunting excursion. 

O king, a servant followed the 
Pandavas at his ease with the necessary 
things (for (he hunt) and took a dog with 
him. 

38. They wandered about the forest, 
intent oil the purpose they had in view ; the 
dog also wandered about alone and came to 
the Nishada (prince). 

39. The dog, seeing the Nishada of dark 
cofour and of body besmeared with fifth, 
with ait attire of black skin, and with matted 
hair on his head, began to bark aloud. 

40. Thereupon he (the Nishada,) exhibit¬ 
ing lightness of hand, at once struck seven 
arrows into the mouth of the barking 
dog. 


41. The dog, thus pierced in the month 
with the arrows, came back to the 
Pandavas, and the pandava heroes on 
seeing this were very much astonished. 

42. Ashamed of their own skill, they 
praised the lightness of hand and precesion 
of airrt by auricular perception (of the 
Nishada Prince) 

43- O king, they thereupon, began to 
search in the forest for that unknown 
dweller of the wood. The Pandavas soon 
found him discharging ceaseless arrows 
from his bow. 

44. Seeing that man of grim visSage,^ 
a total stranger to them,—they asked/‘Who 
are you and Whose soil are you V 9 

The Nishada said 

45. O heroes, I am (he son of the Nishada 
king, Hiranyadhanus. Know me to be a 
pupil of Drona, labouring to acquire the 
science of arms. 

46. The Pandavas, having made them¬ 
selves acquainted with everything connected 
with him, and returning (to Hastinapura) 
told Drona all about the wonderful feat of 
archery they had seen in the forest. 

47. O king, the 9on of Kunti, Arjuna, 
thinking of Ekalavya all the while, saw 
Drona in private, and relying upon his pre¬ 
ceptor’^ love for him he said, 

48. “You have joyfully told me, embra 
cing me to your bossom, no pupil of yours 
should be equal to me. 

49. Why then there is a pupil of yours 
in the world(equaI to me),—the mighty son 
of the Nishada king?” 

50. Thereupon Drona reflected for a 
moment and resolved upon the course he 
should adopt. He then took Sabyashachi 
(Arjuna) with him and went to the Nishada 
(prince). 

51. He saw Ekalavya with body besmeared 
with filth, With matted locks (on his bcadl, 
with rags on. and with a bow in his hand 
with wnich he was ceaselessly shooting 
arrows. 

52. Seeing Drona coming towards him. 
Ekalavya also went a few steps forward 
and touched his feet and prostrated himself 
on the ground. 

53. The son of Nishada worshipped 
Drona in the due form and represented 
himself as his pUpif. He then stood before 
him with joined hands. 

54. O king, thereupon Drona spokk 
thus to Ekalavya, “O hero, if you are 
really my pupil, give me my remuneration .'' 
Ekalavya was much pleased in hearing this, 
and he fetid,' 



ADI PARVA. 


193 


55. O illustrious one, what shall I give 
you, command me. O excellent Brahma¬ 
knowing man, there is nothing that is not 
to be given to my preceptor. 1 

56—58. He (Drona) said, “Give me 
as Dakshina your thumb.' Ekalavya, ever 
devoted to truth and desirous of keeping 
his promise, hearing the fearful words of 
Drona, at once cut off his thumb with a 
cheerful face and unruffled heart, and gave 
it to Drona. Thereupon, O king, when the 
Nishada again began to shoot with the 
help of his other fingers, he found he 
had lost his former lightness of hand. 

59. Arjuna became pleased and his 
fever (of jealousy) was gone. “None will 
equal Arjuna," these words of Drona now 
became true. 

60. Two of Drona’s pupils became 
greatly expert in club fight, namely Duryo- 
dhana and Bhima, who were jealous of each 
other. 

61. Ashwathama excelled all in the 
mysteries (of the science of arms). The 
twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) excelled 
every body in handling the sword. 

62—63. Yudhishthira became the best of car- 
warriors, and Arjuna excelled every one in 
every respect. He surpassed all in intelli¬ 
gence, in the skill of using all weapons, and 
in devotion to his arms and his preceptor. 
He thus became the foremost of all car- 
warriors. 

64. though the instructions (of Drona) 
were equal, (to all), yet the mighty Arjuna 
excelled all (the princes,) and became an 
Atkiratha , a warrior capable of fighting 
with sixty thousands foes all at once. 

65. The wicked-minded sons of Dhri- 
tarastra became jealous of Bhima, for 
he was exceedingly strong, and of Arjuna, 
because he was accomplished. 

66. O best of men, Drona became desir¬ 
ous of examining his pupils knowledge in 
arms and he collected them all together, all 
(the princes) skilled in all the weapons. 

67. He caused an artificial bird made by 
an artizan to be placed on the top of a tree 
without the knowledge of the princes for 
the purpose of using it as the target. 

Drona said:— 

68. Take up quickly, all of you, your 
bows and fix your arrows on the bow¬ 
string. Stand here aiming at that bird on 
the tree. 

69. As soon as I give the order, cut off 
the bird’s head. O sons, I shall give each 
of you a turn one after another. 


Vaishampayana said 

70. The best of the descendants r of 
Angirasha (Drona) first spoke to Yudhis¬ 
thira thus, “ O invincible one, aim with your 
arrow and shoot (the bird) as soon as I 
order." 

71. The chastiser of foes, Yudhishthira 
first took up the bow as ordered by his 
preceptor, and stood aiming at the bird. 

72. O best of the Bharata race, very next 
moment Drona spoke thus to the descendant 
of Kuru (Yudhishthira), standing with bow in 
his hand, 

73. “ O prince, behold that bird on the 
top of the tree." Yudhishthira replied to the 
preceptor, “ O Sir, 1 see it.” Very next 
moment Drona again said, 

Drona said 

74. Do you see the tree, myself, your 
brothers and the bird ? 

Vaishampayana said 

5. That son of Kunti (Yudhishthira) said, 
see the lord of the forest (tree), your¬ 
self, my brothers and the bird." He said 
this again and again being asked (by Drona) 
again and again. 

76. Drona, being displeased, reproach- 
ingly told him, “ Stand back. It is not for 
you to strike at this aim. 

77—78- Thereupon, the greatly illustrious 
(Drona) placed in the same position Duryo- 
dhana and other sons of Dhritarashtra, and 
also Bhima and his other brothers, and 
also all the princes that had come from other 
countries. He asked them one after another 
the same question, but they all replied as 
did Yudhishthira. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty fourth 
Section , Dronas examination of his pupils , 
in the Sambhava of the Adi Parua . 

Section CXXXV. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Drona smilingly called Dhananjaya 
and said to him, "It is to be shot by you. 
Turn your eyes to it. 

2. You must shoot the aim as soon as 
I shall give order. O son, stand here for 
a moment with your bow and arrow." 

3. Having been thus addressed SabyA 
sachi (Arjuna), drawing the bow to A 
semi-circle, aimed at the bird and stood 
there as ordered by the preceptor. 


25 



194 


MAHABHARATA. 


4. Very next moment Drona asked him, 
“ O Arjuna, do you see the bird, the tree 
and myself V’ 

5. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
Partha (Arjuna) replied to Drona, " I see 
only the bird. I do not see the tree or 
yourself. 1 

6. The invincible Drona, being much 
pleased, spoke again a moment after to 
that great car-warrior, the son of Pandu, 
(Arjuna.) 

7. " If you see the bird, describe it to 
me. He (Arjuna) again replied, " I see 
the head of the bird, but I do not see its 
body.’ 

8. Having been thus told by Arjuna, 
Drona was filled with delight and his 
hair stood on their end. He told Partha, 
“ Shoot,’ and he instantly let fly (the 
arrow.) 

9. The Pandava (Arjuna) speedily struck 
off the head of the vulture with his sharp 
arrow and brought it to the ground. 

10. As soon as thi9 feat was performed, he 
(Drona) embraced the son of Pandu (Arjuna) 
and thought that Drupada with his friends 
were already vanquished in the battle. 

11. O best of the Bharata race, some time 
after, the best of Angirashas (Drona) with 
his pupils went to the Ganges to bathe. 

12. When Drona was bathing, a strong 
aligator, as if sent by Death himself, seized 
him at the thigh. 

13. though quite capable of freeing 
himself (from the mouth of the aligator), he 
(Drona) spoke to all his pupils in a hurry, 
“ Kill this aligator and rescue me,” 

14. As soon as he uttered these words, 
Vivatsa (Arjuna) struck the aligator under 
the water with five sharp and irresistible 
arrows. 

15—<>• The others (his pupils) stood 
confounded each at his place. Seeing this 
readiness of Arjuna, Drona considered that 
son of Pandu to be the foremost of all his pu¬ 
pils, and he was exceedingly pleased. The 
aligator, being cut into pieces by the arrows 
of Partha, 

17. Released the thigh of the high-souled 
(DroAa) and gave up his life. Thereupon the 
son of Bharadwaja (Drona) thus addressed 
the illustrious car-warrior (Arjuna), 

18. " O mighty-armed, accept this supe¬ 
rior and irresistible weapon, named 
Brahmasira , with its method of hurling 
and recalling it. 

19. You must not use it against any 
human foe. If hurled at a foe of inferior 
power, it might burn the whole universe. 


20. O son, it is said that this weapon 
hath not a superior in the three worlds. 
Keep it therefore with great care, and listen 
to what I say. 

21. O hero, if ever any foe, if he is not 
human, comes to fight with you, you may 
then use it against him to accomplish his 
death. 

22. Vivatsa (Arjuna) with joined hands 
promised to do as he was bidden, and he 
received the great weapon. The preceptor 
then spoke to him again thus, 

23. "None will ever become a superior 
bowman to you. You will be invincible and 
greatly illustrious. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty fifth 
Section , the rescue of Drona from the 
aligator , in the Sambhava of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section CXXXVI. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O descendant of the Bharata, seeing 
the sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu expert 
in arms, O king, Drona thus spoke to the 
king Dhritarashtra, 

2. In the presence of Kripa, Somadatta, 
Valhika, the wise son of Ganga (Bhishma), 
Vyasa and Vidura. 

3. "O king, O best of the Kurus, your 
sons have completed their education. Let 
them with your permission show their profi¬ 
ciency.” Thereupon the great king replied 
with a delightful heart. 

Dhritarashtra said 

4. O best of Brahmanas, you have accom¬ 
plished a great deed. O son of Bhara¬ 
dwaja, command me yourself as to the 
place and time, where and when, and the 
manner in which, the trial may be held. 

5. Grief for my blindness makes me 
envy those men who are blessed with 
sight and who will see my children’s prowess 
in arms. 

6. O Khattwa (Vidura), do all that the 
respected preceptor says. O lover of 
virtue, I think nothing can be more agree¬ 
able to me than this. 

Vaishampayana said 

7. Thereupon Vidura, giving the neces¬ 
sary assurance to the king, went out to do 
what he was bidden. The greatly learned 
son of Bharadwaja (Drona) measured a 
piece of (ground), 



ADI PARVA. 


195 


8—9. Which was void of trees and 
thickets and which was furnished with wells 
and springs. On this piece of land, that 
first of eloquent men, that hero (Drona), 
gave offerings to the gods according to 
thej precepts of the Sastras, when all the 
people were assembled by proclamation 
on an auspicious day with an auspicious 
star in ascendance. 

10. O best of men, the artizans built a 
great auditorium by the order of the king ; 
(they built) another for the (royal) ladies also 
according to the proper form. 

11. The citizens built many platforms 
and the wealthy men many spacious and 
high Sibikas . 

12. When the (fixed) day came, the king 
accompanied by his ministers, with Bhishma 
and Kxipa,—the excellent preceptor, walk¬ 
ing at the head (of .the procession), 

13. Came to the auditorium of celestial 
beauty, made of pure gold and decked with 
strings of pearls and stones of Vaidurya 
gems. 

14—16. The greatly fortunate Gandhari 
and Kunti and the other ladies of the royal 
household, dressed in gorgious attire and 
accompanied by their maids-in-waiting, joy¬ 
fully ascended the platforms as celestial 
ladies ascend the Sumeru mountain. Brah- 
manas, Kshatriyas, and the others of the four 
orders of caste hurriedly left the city and came 
running there with the desire of seeing the 
princes” skill in arms, and they were so 
eager that they assembled all there in a 
moment. 

17. That vast crowd with the noise of 
blowing tRurupets and beating dRurus and 
the sounds of many voices became like an 
agitated ocean. 

18—19. Then the preceptor, dad in white 
attire, with white sacred thread, white locks, 
white beard, white garlands, and white 
sandal-paste besmeared over his body, en¬ 
tered the arena with his son. It appeared as 
if the moon accompanied by (tne planet) 
Mars appeared in an unclouded sky. 

20. The best of strong men, the hero 
(Drona), entering at the proper time, caused 
Brahmanas versed in Mantras to celebrate 
the auspicious rites. 

21. After auspicious and sweet-sounding 
musical instRuruents had struck up as a 
propitiary ceremony, men equipped with. 
various weapons entered the arena. 

22. Then the best of the Bharata race, 
(the princes), those mighty car-warriors, 
having girt up their loins, entered (the 
arena) equipped with bows, quivers and 
finger protectors. 


23. With Yudhbthira at their head, the 
greatly heroic princes, in the order of their 
age, began to show wonderful skill in their 
arms. 

24. Some (spectators) lowered their heads 
out of fear of the falling arrows, while others 
not being afraid, looked on with wonder and 
astonishment. 

25- Riding swift horses and managing 
them dexterously, the princess hit marks 
with arrows engraved with their respective 
names. 

26. On seeing the prowess of the princes 
in using their bows and arrows, the specta¬ 
tors thought they were seeing the city of 
Gandharva. They were all filled with 
amazement. 

27. O descendant of Bharata, some 
hundreds and thousands of men, their eyes 
expanded with wonder, all at once cried out 
“Well done ! Well done!” 

28. After repeatedly displaying their 
skill and dexterity in the use of bow and 
arrows, in the management of cars, in the 
fight on horseback and on the back of 
elephants, 

29. They took up their swords and 
buckles and began to attack one another 
and to walk around the arena displaying 
various modes of sword’s play. 

30. They ail saw their (great) agility, 
the beauty of the symetry of their bodies, 
their grace, their calmness, the firmness of 
their grasp and the skill in the use of their 
swords and L u :kles. 

31. Then Vrikodara (Bhima) and Sujo- 
dhana (Duryodhanal entered the (arena) 
with secret mental aelight like two single 
peaked mountains. 

32. Those mighty-armed heroes girt 
their loins and summoned all their strength; 
they roared like two infuriated elephants 
contending (for a female elephant). 

33 Those two greatly strong (heroes) 
circled round the arena with faultless clubs 
and careered right and left in all the proper 
form. 

34. Vidura described to Dhritarashtra 
and the mother of the Pandavas (Kunti) 
to Gandhari all the feats of the princes. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty sixth 
Section , the tournament , in the Sambhava 
of the Adi Parva . 



196 


MAHABHARATA. 


Section CXXXVII. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vai shampayana said =— 

i. On the appearance of the Kuril prince 
(Duryodhana) and the foremost of all strong 
men Bhima, the spectators were divided 
into two parties by their partiality swayed 
by the love (towards each of the contending 
heroes). 

а. Some cried, n Behold the heroic 
Kuru prince ; ” some cried, “ Behold heroic 
Bhima.” thus from these cries of the people 
rose a great uproar (in the arena). 

3. On seeing the place become like a 
troubled ocean, the intelligent son of 
Bharadwaja (Drona) spoke to his dear son 
Ashwathama, 

Drona said:— 

4. ” Stop these two mighty heroes, so 
expert in arms. Let not the anger of the 
assembled people be excited by this en¬ 
counter between Bhima and Duryodhana. 

Vaishampayana said •— 

5. Thereupon the two combatants, with 
uplifted clubs, resembling two swolen oceans 
agitated by the winds that blow at the time 
of the world's dissolution, were stopped by 
the son of the preceptor. 

б. Then Drona entered the arena, and 
stopping the musicians spoke thus in a 
voice deep as the roars of the clouds. 

7. 11 Behold all of you now that Partha 

who is dearer to me than my own son, who 
is the master of all arms, who is the son of 
Indra himself and who is like the younger 
brother of lndra. H 

8—9. At the command of the preceptor, the 
outhful Falguni (Arjuna), equipped with 
nger protector, his quiver full of arrows, with 
his bow m hand, and with a golden armour 
on, after having performed the propitiatory 
rites, appeared in the arena like an evening 
cloud reflecting the rays of the setting sun 
and illumined by the hues of the rainbow 
and the flashes of lightning. 

10. On this a great cry of joy rose 
from all parts of tne arena, and musical 
instRuruents were played and conches were 
blown. 

11. All cried, M This is the handsome 
son of Kunti, the middle (third) son of 
Pandu. This is the son of Indra. This is 
the protector of the Kuru race. 

12. This is the best of all men learned 
in arms. This is the best of all cherishers 
of virtue. This is the foremost o( all well- 
conducted persons. This is the great reposi¬ 


tory of the knowledge of all (good) man¬ 
ners." 

13. Hearing these loud cries of the 
spectators, the tears of Kunti, mixing with 
the milk of her breast, drenched her bosora. 

14. Having his ears filled with the 
uproar, the best of men, Dhritarashtra, asked 
Vidura with {delight, 

15. “ O Khattwa, what is this great 
uproar, like that of the troubled sea, 
that rises in the arena all of sudden 
echoing the very heavens ?” 

Vidura said:— 

16. O great King, the son of Pritha 
and Pandu, Falguni (Arjuna), clad fn 
armour ; has entered, the arena ; and there¬ 
fore is this uproar. 

Dhritarashtra said 

17. O high-souled man, I have indeed 
been blessed, favoured and protected by 
the three fire (sons! of Pritha (Kunti) who 
is like the sacred fuel. 

7aishampayana said 

18. When the spectators some-what 
regained their equanimity, Vivatsa 



19. He created fire by the Agneya 
weapon, by the Varuna weapon he creat¬ 
ed water. He created winds by the Vayavy 
weapon and by the Parjany a weapon, ne 
created the clouds. 

20. He created land by the Bhouma 
weapon and by the Parvaiya weapon he 
created the mountains. He made all this to 
disappear by the Antardhana weapon. 

21. In a moment he appeared tall and 
in a moment short. He was now yoked in 
his car ; he was in the next moment on the 
car itself; he was then again on the ground. 

22. The favourite (pupil) of the preceptor 
(Arjuna) shot by his arrows various marks, 
some tender, some fine, and some of thick 
composition. 

23. He let fly at one time five arrows 
from his bow stung into the mouth of 
a moving iron boar as if they were but one 
arrow. 

24. That greatly effulgent hero sent 
twenty one arrows into the hollow of a 
cow’s horn hang upon a rope which was 
swinging to and fro. 

25# O sinless one, in this manner he 
(Arjuna), walking round the arena, display¬ 
ed his profound skill in the use of the sword, 
bow and club. 



AD! PARVA. 


26. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
when the tournament was almost ended, 
when the excitement of the spectators cooled 
down and the sound of music stopped, 

27. There was heard at the gate the 
slapping of arms, betokening power and 
strength, like the roars of thunder. 

28. 41 Are the mountains splitting ? Is 
the earth going to be rent assunder ? Is the 
sky resounding with the roars of gathering 
clouds ? ” 

29. O king, all the spectators in the 
arena thought thus, and turned their eyes 
towards the gate. 

30. Drona was surrounded by the five 
brothers, the sons of Pritha, and looked like 
the moon surrounded by the five constella¬ 
tions. 

31. That chartiser of foes, Duryodhana, 
with his one hundred haughty brothers 
and with Ashwathama, stood up in haste. 

32. That prince (Duryodhana) with his 
club in his hand, surrounded by his one 
hundred brothers with uplifted weapons, 
looked like Indra in the days of yore when 
he stood surrounded by the celestials at the 
time of the battle with the Davavas. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty seventh 
Section , the trial of arms , in the Samhhava, 
of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXXXVIII. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaiahampay ana said 

1. When the spectators, with eyes ex¬ 
panded with wonder, made way for that 
subjugator of hostile cities, Karna, he entered 
the spacious arena. 

2. He was armed in his natural coat of 
armour, his face was brightened with his 
ear-rings, his bow was in his hand, and his 
sword in his loins. He entered like a 
walking cliff. 

3. The illustrious destroyer of enemies, 
the large eyed Karna was born of Pritha 
(Kunti) in her maidenhood. He was a 
portion of the hot beamed sun. 

4. His power and energy were like those 
of lions, the bulls or the best of elephants. 
He was like the sun in splendour, moon 
in loveliness and fire in effulgence. . 

5. Being born of the sun, he was tall like 
a golden palm ; he was a youth who could 
slay lions. He was handsome and poss¬ 
essed countless accomplishments. 


6. The mighty armed (hero) looked all 
around the arena and bowed rather .with 
indifference to Drona and Kripa. 

7. The entire assembly of people re¬ 
mained motionless and stared in steadfast 
gaze. They were filled with great curiosity 
and asked one another, “ Who is he ?” 

8. That foremost of eloquent men, the 
son of the Sun, (Karna) in a voice deep as 
the roars of clouds, addressed his unknown 
brother thus, 

9.  O Partha, I shall perform feats be¬ 
fore this assembly excelling all that you 
have done. Behold them, and you will be 
amazed." 

10. O best of all eloquent men, when 
he had hardly finished his words, the 
spectators stood up all at once as ii uplifted 
by some instRuruent. 

11. O best of men, Duryodhana was de¬ 
lighted, while Vivatsa (Arjuna) was filled 
with abashment and anger. 

12. The p reatly powerful Karna, ever 
fond of battle, displayed with the permission 
of Drona all that Partha had displayed 
before. 

13. O descendant of Bharata, Duryodhana 
with his brothers thereupon embraced Karna 
with delight and spoke to him thus, 

Duryodhana said 

14. 11 O mighty-armed hero, welcome to 
you! O man deserving of politeness, I have 
got you by good fortune. Command me 
and the Kuru kingdom at your pleasure. 

Karna said 

15. When you have said this, I consider 
it as already accomplished. I only desire 
your friendship. O lord, I long for a 
single combat with Arjuna. 

Duryodhana said 

16. Enioy with me the good things of 
life. Be the benefactor of your friends. O 
oppressor of enemies, place your feet on the 
heads of all foes. 

Vaishampayana said 

17. Thereupon Partha considered him¬ 
self disgraced and spoke to Karna who 
stood amidst the (Kuru) brothers like a 
hill. 

Arynna said 

18. O Karna, the path which the un¬ 
welcome intruder and the uninvited talker 
comes to shall be yours. 

Karna said:— 

19. This arena is meant (or all; it is 
not for you alone. O Falguni, they are 
kings who are superior in power; Kshatriya 
Dharma depends on prowess ak>ne. 

20. O descendant of Bharata, what need 
is there of altercation which is the habit 
of the weak! Speak in arrows, until 1 
cut off your head to-day in the presence 
of the preceptor. 

Vaishampay ana said 

21. The subduer of hostile cities, 
Partha, was embraced by his brothers, and 
with the permission of Drona he advanc¬ 
ed for the combat. 

22. Thereupon, Karna was embraced 
by Duryodhana with his brothers. Taking 
up his bow and arrows he stood ready for 
fight. 

23. The sky was covered in clouds 
emitting flashes of lightning, and the 
coloured bow of Indra appeared shedding 
its effulgent rays. The clouds seemed to 
be laughing on account of the presence 
of white cranes that were then flying. 

24. Seeing that Indra was thus show¬ 
ing his affection (towards Arjuna), the sun 
dispersed the clouds over his son. 

25. Falguni (Arjuna) was invisible under 
cover of the clouds, but Karna was 
visible on account of the clouds being 
dispersed from him by the sun. 

26. The sons of Dhritarashtra stood by 
Kffma, and the son of Bharadwaja (Drona) 
Kripa and Bhishma stood by Partha. 

27. The assembly was also divided into 
two parties, so were the ladies also. And 
on learning the affair the daughter of Bhoja, 
Kunti fainted away. 

28. The learned in all the precepts of 
virtue, Vidura, revived the insensible Kunti 
by sprinkling over (her face) water mixed 
with sandal-paste. 

29. On being revived she was seised 
with fear on seeing her two sons clad in 
armour, but she could do nothing. 

3°. When the two (heroes) were ready 
with their great bows raised up, the son of 
Saradwatta, Kripa, well versed in all the 
precepts of virtue and expert in the rules of 
duels, said, 

Kripa said 

31. “Tliw son of Pandu is the youngest 
child of Kunti. He is a Kuru and he 
will fight a duel with you. 


32. O mighty armed hero, you should 
also tell us the lineage of your father and 
mother, and the royal line m which you are 
an ornament. 

33. Knowing this, Partha will fight with 
you, or he will not fight (as he will think 
proper.) The sons of kings never fight a 
due) with men of inferior lineage. 

Vaishampayana said 

34. thus addressed, Karna’s face was 
flushed with the blushes of shame, and it 
looked like the pale lotus tom and disfigu- 
ered by the showers of rains. 

Doryodhana said 

35. O preceptor, it is said in the Sastras 
that three classes of men can claim 
royalty, namely persons of noble birth, 
heroes, and those that lead soldiers. 

36. But if Falguni is unwilling to fight 
with one who is not a king, I install him 
(Karna) as the king of Anga. 

Vaishampayana said 

37—38. When the cheers cease at that very 
moment the greatly powerful car-warrior 
Karna, seated on a golden seat, the (royal) 
umbrella over his head, and yak tails waved 
by his side, was installed king of Anga by 
the Brahmanas, learned in the Mantras, m 
the proper form, with paddy, flowers, Gh&ta 
(water-pots) and much gold, 

39. O King, (Karna) said to the Kaurava 
(Duryodhana), u What shall I give you 
compared with your gift of a kingdom! 

40. O king, O best of men, I shall do all 
you will command.” Sujodhana (Duryo¬ 
dhana) replied, M I long for your friend¬ 
ship.” 

41. Having been thus addressed, Karna 
replied. u Be it so. ” They thereupon em¬ 
braced each other in joy and felt great 
happiness. 

thus ends the hundred and thirty eighth 
Section , the tournament , in the Sambnava 
of the Adi Parva. 


Section CXXXIX. 
(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued, 

Vaishampay ana said :— 

t. Thereupon Adhiratha (Karna's father), 
with his sheet loosely hanging down, trem-, 
bling and perspiring, supporting himself on 
a stuff, entered the arena. 

2. Seeing him, Kama left his bow, and 
impelled by filial regard bowed his head, 
wet with the water of his coronation. 

ADI PARVA. 99 


3. The charioteer (Adiratha) hurriedly 
covered his feet with the end of his sheet 
and addressed the successful Karna as his 
son. 

4. He (Adhiratha) embraced him (Karna) 
and wetted his head with tears,—his head 
which was still wet with the water sprinkled 
over it at his coronation as the king of 
Anga. 

5. Seeing him (Adhiratha) the Pandavas 
considered him to be a son of a charioteer, 
and Bhima jeeringly said, 

6. “O charioteer's son, you deserve not to 
be killed by Partha in the battle. You 
shoul i better take up the whip (instead of 
the sword) which befits your race. 

7. O worst of men, you are not worthy of 
enjoying the kingdom of Anga, as a dog 
deserves not the Ghee placed before the 
sacrificial fire." 

8. thus addressed Karna looked at the 
sun in the sky, and with slightly quivering 
lips he heaved a deep sigh. 

9. Like a mad elephant the greatly 
strong Duryadhana rose in anger from 
among his brothers,—who were like an as¬ 
semblage of lotuses. 

10. He said to that doer of fearful deeds, 
Bhimasena there present, “ Vrikodara, you 
should not speak such words. 

11. The strength is the cardinal virtue of 
the Kshatriyas; even a man of inferior birth 
deserves to be faught with. The sources of 
heroes and rivers are the same, both are 
always unknown. 

12. The fire that covers the whole world 
rises from water. The Danava-destroying 
thunder was made of Dadhichi’s bone. 

13. It is heard that the birth of the 
illustrious god Guha (Kartikeya) is full of 
all mysteries. Some say he is the son 
of Agni, (some say) he is the son of Kirtika, 
(some again say) he is the son of Rudra, 
and (others say) he is the son of Ganga. 

r 14. It is also heard that those that were 
born Kshatriyas became Brahmanas. Vish- 
wamitra and others attained to eternal 
Brahma. 

15. The foremost of all wielders of arms, 
the preceptor (Drona), was born in a water 
vessel, and the son of Gotama (Kripa) 
sprang from a,clump of heath. 

16. I know also about your own birth. 
Can a deer give birth to this tiger, as efful¬ 
gent as the sun, born with a natural armour 
and ear-rings, and possessing all auspicious 
marks ? 

17. This lord of men deserves the sove¬ 
reignty of not only Anga but of the whole 


world, by the prowess of his arms end by my 
obedience to him. 

18. If there is any one to whom all 
that I have done to him (Karna) has became 
intolerable, let him ascend his car and bend 
his bow with the help of his feet." 

19. Thereupon there arose a loud cheer 
among all the spectators, approving of 
Duryodhana's speech. At this time the sun 
went down. 

20. Then king Duryodhana took Karna's 
hand and led him out of the arena lighted 
with countless lamps. 

21. The Pandavas also with Drona, 
Kripa and Bhishma returned to their own 
homes. All the people also went to their 
respective houses. 

22. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
some of them named Arjuna, some Karna 
and some Duryodhana (as the victor of the 
day) as they went away. 

23. Kunti also was much pleased out of 
her motherly love towards her son Karna, for 
he had various auspicious marks on his 
person and for he was installed as the king 
of Anga. 

24. O king, Duryodhana, having obtain¬ 
ed Karna, banished his fears arising out 
of Arjuna's proficiency in arms. 

25. And that hero, (Karna), accomplish¬ 
ed m arms also began to gratify Duryodhana with sweet speeches; 
and Yudhishthira was impressed with the belief that there 
was no warrior like Karna on earth. 

thus ends the hundred and the thirty 
ninth Section the tournament , in the , 
Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 


Section CXL. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Seeing the sons of Pandu and 
Dhritarasta accomplished in arms, Drona 
thought that the time had come when he 
could demand the preceptor's Dakshina 
(remuneration.) 

2. O king, one day assembling his 
pupils together, the preceptor Drona asked 
his Dakshina from them all, saying, 

L “Seize the king of Panchala, Drupada, 
ttle and bring him to me. That will 
be the most acceptable Dakshina to me." 

4. Saying “ Be it so," they all ascended 
their chariots with their arms and marched 



200 


MAHABHARATA. 


out with Drona in order to pay the remu¬ 
neration to their preceptor. 

5. Those best of men destroyed the Pan- 
chalas and went to the capital of the greatly 
powerful Drupada and attacked it. 

6. Duryodhana, Karna, greatly strong 
Yuyutsu, Dushashana, Vikarna, Jalasandha, Sulachana, 

7. These and many other princes of 
great prowess, all foremost of Kshatriyas, 
vied with one another to become foremost in 
the attack. 

8 . The princes, riding on first class 
Chariots and followed by cavalry, entered 
the hostile capital and proceeded along its 
streets. 

9. At this time the kins; of the Panchalas, 
seeing the great armv and hearing its roar, 
soon came out of his palace with all his 
brothers. 

10. The king Jagmasena (Drupada) was 
well-armed, but he was assailed by them 
(Kurus) with a shower of arrows, all uttering 
their war cry. 

11. The invincible warrior Jagmasena, 
riding on his white chariot, attacked the 
Kurus and began to rain his fearful arrows. 

12. Seeing the pride of the princes, 
Partha (Arjuna) spoke thus to the preceptor, 
that excellent Brahmana Drona, 

13. M We shall display our power when 
they would finish their’s. They are not 
capable of killing the king of the Panchalas 
in the battle.” 

14. Having said this, that sinless son of 
Kunti (Arjuna) with his brothers waited 
outside the city at a distance of a mile. 

15. Seeing the Kauravas, Drupada 
rushed forward and afflicted the Kuru army 
with a shower of arrows. 

16. Such was his lightness of motion on 
the field of battle that though he was 
fighting alone on a single chariot, the Kurus 
thought in fear that there was more than 
one Drupada. 

17—18. The fearful arrows of Drupada 
fell on all sides, and thousands of conches, 
tRurupets and dRurus began to be sounded 
by tne Panchalas in their houses. O great 
king, a terrible roar, like that of the lion, 
rose from the mighty Panchalas. 

19. The great sound of the twang of 
their bow-strings seemed to rend the very 
sky. (Thereupon) Duryodhana, Vikarna, 
Subahu, Dirghalochana, 

20. And Dushashana, becoming furious, 
began to shower arrows upon the enemy. 
The mighty bow-man, the son of Prishata 


(Drupada), invincible in battle, though 
pierced with arrows, 

21—22. Instantly began to afflict the hos¬ 
tile army. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
careering over the field of battle like a fiery 
wheel, he smote with hjs arrows Duryodhana, 
Vikarna, even greatly powerful Karna and 
many other heroic princes and various other 
soldiers, and slaked their thirst for battle. 

23. Then the citizens showered upon the 
Kurus clubs, maces and other missiles 
like cloud's showering rains. 

24. O descendant of the Bharata race, 
young and old, all the citizens, hearing of 
the battle, rushed out and assailed the 
Kurus. 

25. They (Kurus) broke and fled, wailing 
towards the Pandavas ; and the Pandavas, 
hearing their terrible wail, 

26^27. Ascended their cars after duly 
worshipping Drona. Then Arjuna, haslily 
asking Yudhishthira not to engage in the fight 
by saying “ Don’t fight,” and appointing 
the sons of Madri (Nakula and Sahadeva) 
as the protectors of his chariot wheels, rushed 
out. And Bhima, ever in the front, ran 
ahead with his club in his hand. 

28. The sinless son of Kunti (Arjuna), 
thus accompanied by his brother, hearing 
the shouts of the enemy, advanced towards 
them, filling the whole region with the 
rattle of the wheels of his chariot. 

29—30. As a Makara enters the sea, so 
the mighty-armed Yama-like Bhima with 
his club in his hand entered the Panchala 
ranks and roared as fiercely as the ocean in 
a tempest. 

31. Evei^skillful in battle, Bhima, the 
son of Pritha, upraising his club, attacked 
the soldiers riding on elephants with the 
powers of his arms like the great destroyer 
himself. 

32. Those huge animals like mountains, 
struck with Bhima's club, had their heads 
broken into pieces, and they fell covered 
with blood, like cliffs loosened by thunder. 

33. The Pandava, the elder of Arjuna, 
(Bhima) felled to the ground elephants and 
horses and cars by thousands, and killed 
many foot-soldiers and car-warriors. 

34. As a herdsman drives the cattle with 
his stuff in the wood, so did Vrikodara 
drive before him the chariots and elephants 
(of the hostile force). 

35. Falguni (Arjuna), eager to do the 
favourite work of the son of Bharadwata, 

(Drona), felled the son of Prishata (Drupada) 
from his elephant, covering him with arrows. 



ADI PARVA. 


201 


$6. O king, like the fire at the end of a 
Vuga, he felled in the battle thousands of 
horses, cars and elephants. 

37. Thereupon all the Panchalas and the 
Srinyas, being thus attacked (by Arjuna), 
assailed Partha with a shower of weapons 
of various kinds. 

38. They uttered from their mouths great 
shouts like the roars of lions, and they des¬ 
perately attacked the Pandava (Arjuna). 
The battle became fearful and furious to 
behold. Hearing their great leonine shouts, he 
(Arjuna) became filled with wrath. 

39. Kiriti (Arjuna) immediately assailed 
the Panchalas in the battle, and covering 
them with a shower of arrows, he greatly 
confused them. 

40. They, that saw the son of Kunti 
(at that time), could not mark any interval 
between his fixing the arrows on the bow¬ 
string and letting them off. 

41. The whole place was filled with leo¬ 
nine shouts mixed with cheers of approval. 
Thereupon the king of the Panchalas, ac¬ 
companied with Satyajit (his commander-in- 
chief ) 

42. Rushed towards him with speed, as 
Indra did towards (the Danava) Samvara. 
Partha covered the Panchala king with a 
thick shower of arrows. 

43. Thereupon arose a great uproar 
among the Panchala-host like the roar of a 
great lion when springing on the leader of a 
herd of elephants. 

44. Seeing Arjuna rush towards the 
Panchala-king for slaying him, greatly 
powerful Satyajit attacked him. 

45. The two heroes (Arjuna and the 
Panchala-king) rushed upon each other like 
Indra upon Virochana; and they broke 
each other’s ranks. 

46. Thereupon Partha pierced Satyajit 
with ten keen arrows: at which feat tne 
spectators were all amazed. 

47—48. Thereupon the Panchala (Satya¬ 
jit) covered Partha with one hundred arrows. 
That great car-warrior Arjuna rubbed his 
bow-string in order to increase the force 
and velocity of his arrows. Then cover¬ 
ing the enemy with a shower of arrows, he 
cut off the bow of Satyajit and rushed upon 
the king (Drupada). 

49. But Satyajit immediately took up an¬ 
other bow, and he soon pierced with arrows 
Partha, with his chariot, charioteer and 
horses. 

50—51. thus being assailed, the hero 
Partha did not forgive the Panchala 
(Satyajit). In order to kill him soon, he 
(Arjuna) pierced with a number of arrows 

26 


(his enemy’s) horses, flags, bow, clenched 
fist, charioteer and the attendant at his 
back. Seeing his bow repeatedly cut down, 

52. And his horses slain as often, he 
(Satyajit) desisted from the fight. Seeing 
Satyajit thus desisted from the fight, 

53. The king (Drupada) attacked 
the Pandava (Arjuna) with great speed. 
Then that foremost of victorious heroes, 
Arjuna, faught a wonderful battle. 

54. Cutting off his bow and felling his 
flag-staff on the ground, he pierced his 
enemy’s horses and charioteer with five 
arrows. 

55. Thereupon that son of Kunti 
(Arjuna), throwing aside his bow and taking 
off his quiver, took up a scimitar and sent 
forth a leonine shout. 

56. He suddenly leaped from his chariot 
and fell on that of the Panchala-king. 
Dhananjaya (Arjuna) stood fearlessly on 
the chariot of the Panchala-king, 

57. He siezed him (Drupada) as Garuda 
seizes a huge snake after agitating the 
waters of the deep sea. Thereupon all the 
Panchalas ran away in all directions. 

58. Showing the prowess of arms to all 
the hosts, Dhananjaya (Arjuna), sending 
forth a leonine shout, came out (of the 
Panchala ranks). 

59. Seeing him return (with his cap¬ 
tive), the princes laid waste the capital of 
the illustrious Drupada. 

Arjuna said 

60. This best of kings Drupada is a 
relative of the Kuru heroes. therefore, O 
Bhima, do not kilP his soldiers. Let us 
only give our preceptor’s remuneration. 

Vaishampayana said 

6t. O king thus prevented by Arjuna, 
the greatly strong Bhima, though unsatiat¬ 
ed with the battle, refrained from the act of 
slaughter. 

62. O best of the Bharata race, thus 
seizing Jagmasena Drupada in the battle 
with nis ministers, they offered him to 
Drona. 

63. (Seeing the king) humiliated and 
deprived of wealth and brought under his 
complete control, Drona remembered his 
former hostility towards him, and he thus 
spoke to him, 

64. “Your kingdom and your capital 
have been laid waste by me. Receiving 
your life at my hand, do you desire to revive 
our old friendship V 



202 


MAHABHARATA. 


65. Having said this, he smiled a little 
and again said, “ O hero, do not fear for 
your life. We are Brahmanas that are 
ever-forgiving. 

66. O best of Kshatriyas, from that day 
when in your boyhood you played with me 
in the hermitage, my love and affection for 
you have grown up. 

67. O king, I ask for your friendship 
again. O king, 1 grant you as a boon half 
of your kingdom. 

68. O Jagmasena, how can one be a 
friend of a king who is not a king ? And 
therefore I retain half of your kingdom. 

69. You become the king of the territory 
lying on the southern side ot the Bhagirathi, 
and I become that of the northern side. O 
Panchala, if it pleases you, know me hence¬ 
forth as your friend.’ 

Drupada said 

70. O Brahmana, this is not (at all) 
wonderful to the men of noble soul and great 
prowess. 1 am pleased with you, and I de¬ 
sire to give you everlasting pleasure. 

Vaishampay ana said 

71. O descendant of Bharata, having 
been thus addressed, Drona released him 
(Drupada); and cheerfully performing the 
usual offices of regard,he bestowed upon him 
ihe half of the kingdom. 

72. (Receiving the territory named) 
Makandi with many towns and cities, 
situated on the banks of the Ganges, 
Drupada lived in the best of cities, called 
Kamilya. 

73. After his defeat by Drona, he 
(Drupada) also ruled over the southern 
Panchala up to the banks of the Sarmana- 
wati river. 

74. He was well convinced that he could 
not defeat Drona by Kshatriya might alone, 
—he being very much inferior to him in 
Brahma (spiritual) power. 

75. He therefore wandered over the 
world to find the means of obtaining a son 
(who could defeat Drona). (Meanwhile) 
Drona lived at Ahichatra, 

76. Which was full of towns and cities, 
and which was bestowed upon him by 
Partha after defeating the hero (Drupada). 

thus ends the hundred and fortieth 
Section , the chastisement of Drupada , in 
the Sambhava of the Adi Parva. 


Section CXLf. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O king, after the expiration of a year 
(from this), the son of Pandu, Yudhishthira, 
was installed as the heir-apparent, 

2. For he was noted for his firmness, 
fortitude, patience, benevolence, frankness 
and unswerving honesty of heart. 

3. Thereupon, within a very short time, 
the son of Kunti, Yudhishthira, overshadowed 
the deeds of his father by his good behaviour, 
manners, and close application to business. 

4. The Pandava Vrikodara began to 
receive lessons from Sankarsana (Balarama) 
in sword-fight, club-fight and car-fight. 

5. At the end of his education (in arms), 
he became in strength equal to Dumutsena. 
He remained in harmony with his brothers, 
becoming great in prowess. 

6—7. Arjuna became famous for the 
firmness of his grasp (of weapons), for his 
lightness of motion, his prirision of aim and 
his proficiency in Kshura , Naracha , Valla, 
Vipatha and other straight, crooked and 
heavy weapons. And Drona said that 
there was none in the world who was equal 
to Vivatsa (Arjuna) in lightness of hand 
and in general proficiency. 

8. Thereupon (one day) Drona thus 
spoke to Gudakesha (Arjuna) before the 
assembly of Kauravas. In the time of 
yore Agasta had a disciple in the science of 
arms, 

9—10. Who was known as Agnivisha. 
He was my preceptor and I was his disciple. 
O descendant of Bharata, 1 obtained from 
him by asceticism a weapon, known by the 
name of Brahmasira, which can never be 
futile and which is like thunder itself and 
capable of consuming the whole earth. That 
weapon from what I have done may now 
descend from disciple to disciple. 

11. Giving it to me, my preceptor said, 
“O son of Varadwaja, do not nurl this weap¬ 
on against any human being and against 
one who possesses but little energy.' 

12. O hero, (Arjuna), you haveobtnined 
that celestial weapon (from me) ; none else 
deserves it. But O Vishampata, obey the 
command of that best of Rishis (Agnivisha). 

13. Now give your preceptor's Dakshma 
before all your relatives and cousins. Fal- 
guni <Arjuna) promised to the preceptor 
41 To give (the Dakshina).” 

14. Drona said, “ O sinless one, you 
must fight with me when I fight with you. 



AD! FARVA. 203 


That best of Kurus promised this also to 
Drona. 

15. Touching his feet, he went away 
northwards. There arose a great shout 
covering the whole earth, bounded by the 
belt of sea. 

16—21. (It was) “There was no bowman 
in the whole world equal to Arjuna.” 
Pandava Dhananjaya became proficient 
in club-fight, sword-fight, car-fight and 
bow-fight ; Sahadeva, obtaining the 
whole science of morality and duties 
from the lord of all science Drona, re¬ 
mained obedient to his brothers. Nakula, 
the favourite of his brothers, taught 
by Drona, became known as a skilful 
warrior and a car-warrior. Arjuna and 
the other Pandava princes became so 
powerful that they killed in battle the great 
Sauvira who had performed a sacrifice 
extending for three years, (remaining) un¬ 
daunted by the attacks of the Gandharvas. 
The Yavana king, whom the powerful Pandu 
could not bring under subjection, was (also) 
brought by Arjuna under control. The 
greatly powerful and ever showing disre¬ 
gard for the K arus, 

22—23. The king, named Vipala of the 
Sauvaras was slain by the intelligent Partha. 
Arjuna also subjugated by means of his 
arrows king Sumitra of Sauvira, also known 
as Dattamitra, who always sought for an 
encounter with him. The third of the Pan¬ 
dava princes, assisted by Bhima, on only one 
single car, subjugated all the kings of the 
East backed by ten thousand cars. 

24. In the same way Dhananjaya con¬ 
quered on a single car the whole of the 
South ; 

25. And he sent immense booty to the 
kingdom of the Kurus. thus did the fore¬ 
most of men, the illustrious Pandavas, 

26. Conquering the kingdoms of others, 
extended their own kingdom in the time of 
yore. Seeing the great prowess and strength 
of these mighty bow-men, 

27. King Dhritarashtra’s mind became 
suddenly poisoned against the Pandavas. 
From that day that king became filled with 
so much anxiety that he could not sleep. 

thus ends the hundred and forty-first 
Section , the pensiveness of Dhritarashtra^ in 
the Samvaba of the Adi Parva 

Section CXLII. 

(SAMBHAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Hearing that the heroic sons of Pandu 
were endued with great energy and prowess | 


the king Dhritarashtra became very miserable 
with anxiety. 

2. Thereupon summoning that best of 
ministers, Kanika, learned in politics and 
expert in counsels, Dhritarashtra said 

Dhritarashtra said 

3. O best of Brahmanas, the Pandavas 
are daily over-shadowing the earth. I am 
very jealous of them. Should I have peace 
or war with them ? O Kanika, advise me 
truly ; I shall do your bidding. 

Vaishampayana said 

4. That best of Brahmanas freely 
answered him in these pointed words, well- 
agreeing with the import of politics. 

Kanika said:— 

5. O sinless king, listen to me as I 
answer. O best of the Kurus, you should 
not be angry with me on hearing what 
I say. 

6. Kings should ever be ready with 
upraised sceptor (to rule), and they should 
ever extend their prowess. Carefully 
avoiding all faults of theirs, they should 
ceaselessly watch for the faults of others. 

7. If the king is ever ready with his 
uplifted sceptor, every one fears him. 
therefore he should ever have recourse to 
his sceptor (chastisement) in all he does. 

8. He should so act as others (his 
enemies) may not find any fault in him. 
But he should see the faults (defects) of 
others. He should keep his resources con¬ 
cealed as does a tortoise his members of 
body. 

9. Having begun a particular act, he 
should ever completely accomplish it. A 
thorn, if not wholly extracted, produces a 
fostering sore. 

10-11. The killing of a harmful foe is 
always praiseworthy. If he be powerful, 
if he be escaping, if he be a great 
warrior, one should watch for the hour of his 
disaster, and then kill him without any 
scruple. O son, if the enemy be weak, 
still he should not be scorned. A spark of 
fire can consume a forest if it can spread 
from object to object. 

12. They (kings) should sometimes feign 
deafness and blindness ; for if they are in¬ 
capable of chastising, they should pretend 
not to notice the faults. They should then 
consider their bows as made of straw, but 
they should be as watchful as a herd of deer 
sleeping (in the woods). 

13. When your enemy will be in your 
hands, destroy him by any meaps, open or 



204 


MAHABHARATA. 


secret. Do not show him any mercy, though 
he seeks your protection. 

14. An old enemy should be killed even 
by winning him over by wealth. thus you 
must be free of anxiety, for there is no fear 
from a dead man. 


15. Destroy all the three, five and 
seven resources of the enemy; you must des¬ 
troy them (enemies) by completely uprooting 
them. 

16. Then you should destroy their allies 
and partizans. If the root (principal) is 
destroyed, they (allies) can never exist. 

17. If the root of the lord of the forest 
(tree) is uprooted, its branches and twigs 
can never exist as before. Carefully con¬ 
cealing your own weakness and watching 
those of your enimies, 

18. O king, you should rule over your 
kingdom, ever being very watchful. By 
maintaining the perpetual fire, by sacrifices, 
by brown clothes, by matted locks and skin 
cloth, 

19—20. You should first gain the con¬ 
fidence of men (your enemies) ; and then you 
should spring upon them like a wolf. It is 
said that in earning wealth, hypocrisy is a 
cheap means. As a hooked staff is used to 
bena down a bough of a tree to pluck the 
ripe fruits, so this method should be adopted 
in destroying one’s own enemies. 

21. Carry your enemy on your shoulder 
till the time comes when you can throw him 
down and break him into pieces as a 
earthen vessel is broken being thrown on 
stones. 


22. An enemy should never be allowed 
to escape, even if he piteously addresses 
you. You ought not to show him any 
mercy ; he must be slain at once. 

23. Enemies should be destroyed by the 
arts of conciliation, or the expenditure of 
money, or by producing disunion amongst 
his allies, or by the employment of every 
means in your power. 


of four friends, namely a tiger, a wdf, a 
mouse and a mongoose. 

27. They saw in the woods a strong 
deer, the leader of a herd, whom however 
they could not seize for his fleetness and 
strength. Thereupon they held a consulta¬ 
tion. 

The Jackal said 

28. O tiger, you have made many 
attempts to seize this deer, but your efforts 
were in vain, for this deer is young, fleet 
and intelligent. 

29. Let the mouse go and eat into its 
feet when it is asleep. When his feet will be 
thus eaten, let the tiger go and seize it. 

30. Then we shall all eat it with a 
delightful heart. 

Kanika said 

Hearing these words of the jackal, they 
carefully did what he said. 

31. The feet of the deer being eaten up 
by the mouse, he was killed by the tiger. 
The jackal said, “ Blessed be you! Go and 
perform your ablutions. I shall look after 
it (the deer) M 

32. Hearing what the jackal said, they 
all went to a river. The jackal watted 
there, deeply meditating what he should 
do (next). 

33. The greatly strong tiger came first 
after his bath, and saw the jackal sitting j n 
a pensive mind. 

The tiger said 

34. O greatly wise one, what are you 
pondering over ? You are the foremost of all 
intelligent persons. Let us enjoy ourselves 
(now) by feasting on this carcass. 

The jackal said ••— 

35. O mighty-armed one, hear what the 
mouse has said. (He said) “Fie on the 
strength of the king of beasts (tiger). The 
deer has been killed by me; 


Dhritarashtra said 

24. Tell me in detail how can a foe be 
destroyed by the arts of conciliation, or the 
expenditure of money or by producing 
disunion or by the employment of force. 

Kanika said 

25. O king, hear what happened in the 
days of yore. O great king, there dwelt in 
the forest a jackal well-acquainted with the 
science of politics. 

26. The jackal was wise and mindful 
of his own interst. He lived in the company 


36. He will gratify his hunger to-day 
by the might of my arms. ” When he has 
tlius boasted, I, for my part, do not wish to 
touch this food. 

The Tiger said 

37. If the mouse has really said this, 
my sense is awakened. I shall from this 
day kill with the might of my own arms 
the beasts of the forest and feast on their 
flesh. 

Kanika said 

Having said this he went away into the 
forest. 



AD! PARVA. 


205 


38. At this time the mouse came there. 
Seeing him come, the jackal thus spoke to 
him. 

The Jackal said 

39. Blessed be you, O mouse. Listen to 
what the mongoose has said. (He said) 
41 The flesh of this deer is poisoned (by’the 
touch of the tiger). I shall not eat it. 

40. If you give me permission I shall 
eat the mouse." 

Kanika said 

Having heard this, the mouse became 
alarmed, and he quickly entered his hole. 

41. O king, then after his bath came 
there the wolf. On his coming, the jackal 
spoke to him thus. 

The Jackal said 

42. The king of the beasts (tiger) has 
become angry with you. No good will come 
to you. He will be soon here with his wife. 
Do now as you please. 

Kanika said 

43 - The wolf, ever fond of animal food, 
fled contracting his body into the smallest 
dimensions ; and thus was he got rid of by 
the jackal. J 

44  At this tune the mongoose came. 
O great king, the jackal thus spoke to the 
mongoose in the forest. 

The Jackal said 

45 - I have defeated others with the might 
my arms, and they have already fled away. 
Fight with me first, and then eat this flesh 
as you please. 

The Mongoose said:— 

46. When the king of the beasts (tiger) 
the wolf, and the intelligent mouse have all 
been defeated by you,—heroes as they are, 
you seem to be a greater hero than they. 

I do not desire (therefore) to fight with you. 

Kanika said 

Saying this he went away. 

. 47  When thus they all went away, the 
jackal was much pleased in his heart for 
the success of his policy, and he alone ate 
the flesh (of that deer). 

48 49. If kings act in this way, they can 
always be happy. thus should the timid, 
by exciting their fears, the courageous by 
the arts of conciliation, the covetuous by gift 
of wealth ajid the inferiors and the equals 
by the exhibition of prowess, be brought into 
subjugation. O king, besides what I have 
said, listen to something else that I say. 


50. If your son, friend, brother and 
father, or even your preceptor, become your 
enemy, if you desire prosperity, you 
should 

51. Destroy him by curses, by incanta¬ 
tions, by gift of wealth, by poison or by 
deception. He should never be neglected 
out of scorn. 

5 2 —53 If both the parties be equal and 
success uncertain, then he who acts with 
diligence grows in prosperity. If the pre¬ 
ceptor himself be vain, ignorant of what 
should be done and what should be left 
undone and vicious in his ways, even he 
should be chastised. If you are angry, show 
yourself as if you are not so, speaking then 
with even smiles. 

54. O descendant of Bharata, never re- 
rove any one with indications of anger, 
peak soft words before you hit (your 

enemy), (speak soft words) even when you 
are hitting (your enemy). 

55. After hitting (your enemy), pity the 
victim, and grieve for him, and even shed 
tears. Securing confidence (of the enemy) 
by conciliation, by gift of wealth and by 
long kind behaviour, 

56. You must destroy him if he does not 
walk aright. The gratly sinful men live as 
if they are very virtuous. 

57. He conceals his sins, as black clouds 
cover the mountains. You should burn the 
house of those that should be killed by 
you. 

5—59- You should never permit beggars, 

I atheists and thieves to live in your kingdom. 
By a sudden sally or pitched battle, by 
poison, by gift of wealth, or by any means, 
you must destroy your enemy. You can act 
with the greatest cruelty. You should make 
your teeth sharp (enough) to bite with fatal 
effect. You must destroy him so effectually 
that he may not again raise up his head. 
You should always fear even those from 
whom you have no fear. 

60. If you do not fear a man, by him 
your root may be destroyed (your ruin may 
come). You should never trust the faith¬ 
less, nor should you trust too much those that 
are faithful. 

61. If fear (enmity) is engendered in a 
man whom you trust, your root may be des¬ 
troyed (vour total ruin may come). The 
spies should be first carefully tested of their 
fidelity, and then they should be appointed 
in your own (kingdom) or in (the kingdom 
of others). 

62. The spies in the kingdoms of others 
should be scoundrels, and persons in the 
garbs of ascetics. They should be (placed) 



206 


MAHABHARATA. 


in gardens, in places of amusements, in 
temples, 

63. In drinking-halls, in streets and with 
all the Thirthas (state officials), in places of 
sacrifice, near wells, on mountains, in 
forests, 

64. In all plates where people congre¬ 
gate, and on rivers. They should move about 
in these places ; they should be humble in 
speech, but their hearts must be as sharp 
as the razors. 

65—67. When you are engaged in doing 
a very cruel and terrible act, you should talk 
with smiles on your lips. If you desire for 
prosperity, you must (adopt these acts, name¬ 
ly) fold your hands, be humble, take oath, 
use conciliation, worship the feet of 4 others by 
lowering your head, and inspire hope. A man 
of policy should be like a tree decked with 
flowers but bearing no fruits. If there be 
any iruit, it must be inaccessible and at a 
great height. If ripe, they must look raw. 
Such a man never fades Tribarga , 
(Dharma, Artha and Kama) has three 
evils knit together (with three good), 

68. Extracting the good from it, the 
evil should be avoided. He who practices 
virtue has also two diseases, (evils to cope 
with), 

69—70. (Namely,) the want of wealth 
and the neglect of pleasure. Those in 
pursuit of pleasure are made unhappy for 
the neglect of the two others. Ana those 
who pursue pleasure suffer for the 
want of virtue and wealth. therefore you 
should pursue virtue, wealth and pleasure 
in such a way that you may not have to 
suffer in any way. With humilition and 
attention, without jealousy and solicitations, 
you should in all sincerity consult with 
Brahmanas in accomplishing your purpose. 
When you are fallen, you should raise your¬ 
self by any means, either gentle or violent. 

71. When you have raised yourself, you 
should practise virtue. The man who has 
never met with any calamity can never have 
prosperity. 

72. This is seen in the life of one who 
has passed through calamities. He who 
is afflicted with sorrow should be consoled 
by the recitation of old history. 

73. The ignorant (should be consoled) 
by the hope of future prosperity and the 
learned by pleasing offices. He who 
quietly reposes after concluding a treaty 
with an enemy, considering himself crowned 
with success, 

74. Is, like a person who awakes after 
having fallen down from the top of a tree 
where he slept. Counsel should be kept 
concealed without the fear of calumny. 


75—77. And while seeing every thing 
with the eyes of his spies, he should conceal 
his own thoughts before the spies of others 
Like a fisherman who becomes rich by 
catching and killing fish, a king grows pros¬ 
perous by tearing the vitals of his enemy 
and by doing some violent acts. 'Die 
strength of your enemy as represented by 
his force should always be completely des¬ 
troyed, by ploughing it up, by mowing it 
down or by afflicting it with disease, star¬ 
vation and want of drink. A person in 
want never goes to a person in affluence. 
When your purpose has been fulfilled, you 
need not go to the man whom you have 
hitherto looked to for its accomplishment. 

78—79. therefore, when you do a thing, 
do it completely, leaving nothing to be 
done. He who desires prosperity, should 
diligently exert to seek for allies and 
means in order to conduct his war. He 
should act in such a way that both friends 
and foes may not know his intention before 
the commencement of the act. 

80. Let them know it when the act has 
been commenced or ended. As long as 
danger does not come, so long only should 
you look as if you are afraid. 

81—82. Seeing the danger already come, 
you should grapple it courageously. The 
man, who trusts his fenemy who is already 
under his control, invites his own death as a 
mule by her conception. You should con¬ 
sider the future acts as already arrived, 

83. Else on account of the loss of reason, 
you may overlook an important point (in 
accomplishing the act). He who desires 
prosperity, should always exert himself with 
energy and prudence, 

84. Adopting his measures (suited) to time 
and place, destiny and Dharma, Artha and 
Kama. It is well known that time and 
place produce the greatest good. 

85. If an enemy is despised and over¬ 
looked, he may soon grow like a palm tree 
extending its roots, or like a spark of fire in 
the deep forest that may soon flame up to 
a great conflagration. 

86. As a small fire, if fed with fagots, soon 
becomes capable of consuming all, so a man, 
who increases his power by making alliances, 
soon becomes capable of vanquishing even 
the strongest foe, 

87. The hope, that you give to your 
enemy,should be long deferred to be fulfilled. 
When the time comes for fulfilling it, in¬ 
vent some pretext to defer it still. Lt the 
pretext appear as founded on some reason, 
and let that reason (also) appear as founded 
on some other reason. 



ADI PARVA. 


207 


• 88. Unpitying and sharp, concealed in 

their leathern cases, striking when opportu¬ 
nity comes, sweeping of all hair, kings should 
resemble razors in the matter of des¬ 
troying their enemy. 

89. O supporter of the Kuru dignity, act 
with the Pandavas and others as policy 
dictates, and (act) in such a way that you 
may not have to repent in future. 

90. 1 have not the least doubt that you 
are endued with every blessing and good 
fortune, O king, therefore, protect yourself 
from the sons of Pandu. 

91. O king, the sons of Pandu are 
stronger than their a usins (your sons). O 
chastiser of foes, I tell you plainly what you 
ought to do. 

92. O king, hear it with your sons, and 
hearing it exert yourself. O king, act in 
such a way that you may not have any fear 
from the sons of Pandu. Adopt such measures 
in acordance with statesmanship, that you 
may not have to repent in future. 

Vaishampayana said 

93. Having said this Kanika went away 
to his house and the descendant of Kuru Dhri- 
tarastra became pensive and sad. 

thus ends the hundred and forty-second 
Section , the counsel of Kanika , in the Sam - 
bhava of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXLIII. 

(JATUGRIHA PARVA.) 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Thereupon after consulting with one 
another the son of Suvala (Shakuni) king 
Duryodhana, Dushashana and Karna formed an evil conspiracy. 

2. They resolved with the sanction of the 
descendant of Kuru the king Dhritarasta to 
burn to death Kunti with her sons. 

3. The wise and learned Vidura, capable 
of reading the heart (of men) by external 
signs, came to know from their demeanours 
the intention of those wicked-minded men. 

4. Thereupon, the sinless Vidura, whose 
soul was enlightened with true knowledge and 
who was ever devoted to the good of the Pan¬ 
davas, resolved that Kunti should escape with 
her sons. 

5. Thereupon he procured a boat with 
machinery and flags, and which was strong 
enough to withstand wind and waves. He 
then spoke to Kunti thus. 


Vidura said 

6. This Dhritarashtra is born to destroy 
the fame and offspring of our (Kuru) race. 
Being wicked-minaed, he is going to cast off 
eternal virtue. 

7. O amiable lady, I have kept ready 
in the river a boat, capable of withstanding 
both wind and waves. By it escape with 
your sons from the net of death. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

8. O best of the Bharata race, having 
heard this, Kunti became deeply grieved. 
She then with her sons got into the boat 
and went over the Ganges. 

9. Then leaving the boat according to the 
advice of Vidura, the Pandavas entered a 
forest taking the wealth that was given to 
them. 

10. for some reasons a Nishada woman 
came to the house of lac and though (she 
was) innocent, she was burnt to death with 
her five sons. 

11. The worst of Mlechas, the sinful 
Purochana, was also burnt to death. thus 
were deceived the sons of Dhritarashtra with 
their counsellors. 

12. thus also were the illustrious sons o 
Kunti with their mother saved by the advice 
of Vidura ; but the people did not know that 
they were alive. 

13. Thereupon the citizens of Varanavata, 
seeing the house of lac burnt down, became 
exceedingly grieved. 

14. They sent messenger to the king to 
tell him all that had happened, and they 
said, M Your great end has been acheivea, 
you have burnt to death the Pandavas. 

15. O descendant of Kuru, your desire is 
(now) fulfilled ; enjoy the kingdom with your 
sons.” Having neard this, Dhritarashtra 
with his sons expressed their sorrow. 

16. He performed the last rites of the 
Pandavas with his friends and relatives, 
with Khattwa (Vidura) and that foremost 
of the Kurus, Bhishma. 

Janamejaya said 

17. O best of the twice-born, I desire 
to hear in detail the account of the burning 
of the house of lac and the escape of the 
Pandavas. 

18. That was a cruel act of theirs, acting 
under the counsel of the wicked. Recite 
the history to me,—all as it happened. I am 
full of great curiosity. 

Vaishampayana said 

19. O chastiser of foes, O king, listen to 
me. 1 shall describe to you the burning of 
the lac-house and the escape of the 
Pandavas. 

20. Seeing Bhimasena exceedingly strong 
and Dhananjaya (Arjuna) highly accom¬ 
plished, Duryodhana became pensive and 
sad. 

21. Thereupon the son of the sun, Karna, 
and the son of Suvala, Shakuni, tried by 
various means to cause the death of the 
Pandavas. 

22. The Pandavas, however, counte¬ 
racted them one after the other as they 
were made, and in obedience to the counsel 
of Vidura, they never talked it afterwards. 

23. O descendant of Bharata, seeing the 
sons of Pandu, endued with all accomplish¬ 
ments, the citizens began to speak of their 
accomplishments in every place of resort. 

24. Assembling in court-yards and in 
other places of meeting, they talked of the 
eldest son of Pandu as the person fit for 
governing the kingdom. 

25. (They said), u The King Dhrita- 
rastra, though possessed of the eye of know¬ 
ledge, did not obtain the kingdom, because 
he was blind. How can he be king (now) ? 

26. And the son of Shantanu, Bhishma, is 
of rigid vows and devoted to truth ; having 
relinquished the kingdom before, he will 
never accept it now. 

27. We shall therefore with all proper 
ceremonies, install the eldest Pandava 
(Yudhishthira) endued with youth, accom¬ 
plished in battle, versed in the Vedas, and is 
truthful and kind. 

28. Worshipping the son of Shantanu, 
Bhishma, and virtuous Dhritarashtra, he 
(Yudhishthira) will certainly maintain Bhishma 
and Dhritarashtra with all his sons." 

29. The wicked-minded Duryodhana, 
hearing these words of the men attach¬ 
ed towards Yudhishthira, was exceedingly 
grieved. 

30. The wicked-minded man was much 
afflicted, and he could not bear their words. 
Being inflamed with jealousy, he went to 
Dhritarashtra. 

31. Finding him alone, he duly saluted 
him with reverence, and having been dis¬ 
tressed by the partiality of the citizens 
(towards Yudhishthira), he spoke thus :— 

Duryodhana said ; — 

32. O father, I have heard (the citizens) 
uttering words of Hl-omen. Passing you and 
Bhishma by, they desire the son of Pandu to 
be their king. 

33. Bhishma will give his consent to this, 
for he will not desire to rule the kingdom. 


It seems the citizens are desiring to inflict 
a great injury on us. 

34. Pandu formerly obtained the ances¬ 
tral kingdom by virtue of his own accom¬ 
plishments. Because you were blind, you 
did not get the kingdom, though you have 
every accomplishment to obtain it. 

35. If the son of Pandu now obtains the 
kingdom as his inheritance from Pandu, 
then his son will obtain it after him ; that 
son’s son also and so on,—it will thus for ever 
descend on Pandu’sline. 

36. We shall then with all our sons be 
excluded from the royal line. O lord of the 
world, we shall be disregarded and hated 
by all the people. 

37. Becoming dependants on others for 
our food, we shall suffer perpetual distress, 
O king, therefore, adopt such counsel that 
is consonant with statesmanship. 

38. O king, however the people might be 
unfavourable towards us if you had obtained 
the kingdom before, we would have certainly 
succeeded to it. 

thus ends the hundred and forty-third 
Section , the jealousy of Duryodhana , in the 
Jatugriha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CXLIV. 

(J ATUGRIH A)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Having heard these words of his son 
and also all that Kanika had said, the king 
possessed of the eye of knowledge, 

2. Dhritarashtra became afflicted with 
sorrow and his mind was full of misgivings. 
Then Duryodhana, Karna, the son of Suvala 
Shakuni, 

3. Dushashana, these four held a con¬ 
sultation together. Then Duryodhana spoke 
thus to the king Dhritarashtra, 

4. “ Send the Pandavas by some con¬ 
trivance to the city of Baranavata. Then 
we will have no fear of them." 

5. Dhritarashtra having heard these words 
of his son, reflected for a moment and then 
spoke to Duryodhana thus, 

6 . 11 Pandu was ever devoted to virtue; he 
always behaved dutifully towards all his 
relatives but particularly towards me. 

7. He cared not for food or dress or the 
enjoyments of the world, he was devoted to 
me and gave me every thing even the king¬ 
dom, 



ADI PARVA. 


209 


8. His son (Yudhishthira) is as much de¬ 
voted to virtue as he was; he is possessed 
of every accomplishment; he is illustrious; 
he is the favourite of the people. 

9. How can we exile him by force from 
the kingdom of his fore-fathers,—specially 
as he possesses allies ? 

10. The counsellors and the soldiers, and 
their sons and grandsons, all were specially 
cherished and maintained by Pandu. 

11. They being thus formerly benefitted 
by Pandu, O son, why should not the people 
of the city kill us all with our relatives and 
friends for the sake of Yudhishthira ? 

Duryodhana said 

12—13. O father, what you say is per¬ 
fectly true. (But) on account of the evil 
that is likely in store for us in the future, 
we think we must conciliate the people by 
bestowing wealth and honours. thus they 
would surely side with us for this proof of 
our power. O king, the ministers and the 
treasury are now under our control, 

14. therefore, you should banish the 
Pandavas to the city of Varanavata by 
some gentle means. 

15. O king, when I shall be installed as 
king, then, O descendant of Bharata, Kunti 
with her son may again come back. 

Dhritarashtra said 

16. O Duryodhana, this is the very 
thought that exists m my mind, but from its 
sinfulness, I could not give it out. 

17. Neither Bhishma, nor Drona, nor 
Kattwa (Vidura), nor Goutama, (Kripa) will 
ever sanction the banishment of the sons 
of Kunti. 

18. O son, in their eyes we (Kurus) and 
the Pandavas are equal. Those wise and 
virtuous men will make no difference 
between us. 

19. O son, (if we do this), whv should we 
not deserve death at the hands of the Kurus 
and of those illustrious men (Bhishma and 
others),—nay of the whole world ? 

Duryodhana said:— 

20. Bhishma is always neutral ; the son of 
Drona ( Ashwathama) is in my side. There 
is no doubt Drona will also be in that side 
in which his son will be. 

21. The son of Saradwatta, Kripa, will 
surely be on die side in which these two will 
be. He will never abandon Drona and his 
nephew (sister’s son, Ashwathama). 

22. Kattwa (Vidura) is dependant on 
us for his livelihood, although he is covertly 
on the side of the enemy (the Pandavas). 


He alone can do us no harm, (even) if he 
sides the Pandavas. 

23. (therefore) without any fear, exile the 
sons of Pandu with their mother to Vara¬ 
navata. Take such steps as they may go 
there this very day. 

24. Estinguish by this act the grief that 
consumes me like a fire, that rote me of my 
sleep and that pierces my heart like a 
terrible dart. 

thus etuis the hundred and forty •‘fourth 
Section , the consultation of Duryodhana , 
in the Jatugriha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXLV. 

(JATUGRIHA)— Continued, 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Thereupon King Duryodhana with his 
brothers began slowly to win over the people 
to his side by bestowing on them wealth 
and honours. 

2. One day in the (royal) Court, some 
clever ministers, as instructed by Dhrita¬ 
rastra, described the city of Varanavata as 
a (most) charming place. 

3. (They said), “ The festival of Pashu- 
pati (Siva) has begun in the city of 
Varanavata, and the concourse of people 
there is now great. 

4. The procession is the most grand in 
the world; and all gems and jewels (now) 
there delight the heart.” thus did they 
(counsellors) under instruction from Dhrita¬ 
rastra, speak (of the city). 

5. O king, while they were speaking of 
the charming city of Varanavata, the 
Pandavas desired in their mind to go 
there. 

6. When the king Dhritarashtra knew 
that their (Pandavas 7 ) curiousity had been 
awakened, then the son of Ambiftca, (Dhrita¬ 
rastra) spoke thus to the Pandavas. 

Dhritarashtra said:— 

7. My men tell me daily again and 
again that the city of Varanavata is the 
most charming in the world. 

8. O sons, if you desire to see the festival 
of Varanavata, go (there) with your friends 
and followers, and enjoy yourselves like the 
celestials. 

9. Bestow gems and jewels on all the 
Brahmanas  and the musicians ’ (there). 
Sport there as the effulgent celestials. 

10. Enjoy there for sometime as much 
happiness as- you like at pleasure, and then 
return to Hastinapur. 


27 



MAHABHARATA. 


2»0 

Vaishampayana said:— 

ii. Yudhistbira, understanding the 
motives of Dhritarashtra and knowing him¬ 
self weak and friendless, said, “Be it so.“ 

12—14. Then addressing the son of 
Shantanu, Bhishma, the wise Vidura, Drona, 
Valhika, the Kaurava Somadatta, Kripa, 
Ashwathama, Bhurisrava, and other res¬ 
pected counsellors, Brahmanas, ascetics, 
priests, citizens, and the illustrious Gan- 
dhari, Yudhishthira slowly and humbly 
spoke thus. 

Yudhishthira said:— 

15. We go with our friends and followers 
to the charming and populous city of 
Varanavata at the command of Dhritaras¬ 
tra. 

16. Give us cheerfully your benedictions, 
so that, acquiring prosperity with it, we may 
not be touched by sin. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

17. Having been thus addressed by the 
son of Pandu, all the Kauravas cheerfully 
pronounced blessings on them, saying, 

18. “O sons of Pandu, let all the elements 
bless you on your way and let not the slight¬ 
est evil befall you. M 

19. Having performed propitiatory rites 
for obtaining the kingdom and making all 
other preparations, the princes (the Panda- 
vas) started for Varanavata. 

thus ends the hundred and forty-fifth 
Section , the departure for Varanavata, in 
the Jatugriha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXLVI. 

(JATUGRIHA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O descendant of Bharata, when the 
king thus addressed the sons of Pandu, the 
wicked-minded Duryodhana became ex¬ 
ceedingly happy. 

2. O best of the Bharata race, he sum¬ 
moned in private, Purochaoa and taking 
up his right hand, he thus spke to that 
counsellor. 

Duryodhana said 

3 O Purochana, this world, full of wealth, 
Is mine. It is equally yours with me. 
(therefore), you should protect it. 

4. 1 have no other more trustworthy 
supporter and counsellor than you witn 
whom I can consult. 


5. O sire, keep my counsel (a secret), 
and destroy my enemy by some clever 
device. Accomplish, what I ask you to do. 

6. The Pandavas have been sent by 
Dhritarashtra to Varanavata. They will 
sport there in the festival at the command 
of Dhritarashtra. 

7. Do that by which you can reach 
Varanavata this very day on a car drawn 
by swift asses. 

8. Going there, erect a quandrangte 
palace at the outskrits of the city, (which 
should be) rich in materials and furniture. 
Guard it (also) well. 

9. Use in it (in erecting that house,) 
hemp, resin, and all other inflammable 
materials that are procurable. 

10. Mixing a little earth with Ghee, oil, 
fat and a large quantity of lac, plaster the 
wall with it. 

11. Place carefuUy all over that house 
hemp, oil, Ghee lac and wood 

12. In such a way that the Pandavas 
and other men may not even with scrutiny 
see them, or conclude that it is made of in¬ 
flammable materials. 

13. Erecting such a house and worship¬ 
ping the Pandavas with great reverence, 
make them live in it with Kunti and aH 
their friends. 

14. Place there for the Pandavas seats, 
conveyances and beds of best workmanship, 
as ordered by my father. 

15. Manage all this in a way so that 
none in the city of Varanavata may know 
it r till the end we have in view is accom¬ 
plished. 

16. Knowing that they are sleeping in 
that house in confidence and without fear, 
set fire to it, beginning from the gate. 

17. The people will think that they have 
been burnt to death in that burning house; 
and therefore none will be able to blame us 
for the death of the Pandavas. 

Vaishampayana said 

18. Purochana promised to that Kau¬ 
rava (Duryodhana) to carry out all by 
saying, “Be it so j ” and he then went (away) 
on a swift car drawn by asses. 

19. O king, ever obedient to Duryodhana, 
he went without loss of time. Purochana did 
all that the prince said, (asked him to do.) 

thus ends the hundred and forty-sixth 
Section , the instructions to Purochana , in 
the Jatugriha of the Adi Parva . 



ADI PARVA. 


Alt 


Section C X L V I l . 

(JATUGRIHA PARVA)— Continued, 

Vaigbarapajana said:— 

I—2. The Pandavas got on their cars 
yoked with fine horses having the speed 
tike that of the wind. When ascending 
(the car), they touched in grief the feet of 
Bhishma, of the king Dhritarashtra, of the high 
souled Drona, Kripa and Vidura and of all 
the other old men. 

3. thus duly saluting aH the elders of the 
Kant race, embracing the equals, being 
saluted by even the boys, 

4. Taking leave of all the mothers (elderly 
ladies), walking round them respectfully, 
and bidding farewell to all the citizens, they 
(the Pan da vas ) started for Varanavata. 

5. The greatly intelligent Vidura and 
other best of the Kurus, and also the citizens 
followed these best of oteu (for some dis¬ 
tance) in sorrow. 

6. Seeing the sons of Pandu afflicted with 
sorrow and in grief, some of the men of the 
city spoke thus, 

7. “ The king (Dhritarashtra) sees not 
things with an equal eye. He is always 
wicked-minded. The Kuru Dhritarashtra 
does not cast his eye on virtue. 

8. The Pandava (Yudhishthira), the best of 
aQ strong men Bhinaa, or Dhananjaya 
(Arjuna) will never commit the sin of re¬ 
bellion. 

9. What these illustrious (princes) would 
do, the two sons of Madri will also do. 
They have inherited the kingdom from their 
father, but Dhritarashtra can not bear them. 

10. How could Bhishma sanction such an 
act of great sin 7 How could he sanction 
their exile to that wretched city 7 

11. The son of Shantanu, Vtchitravirja, 
and the descendant of Kuru, the royal sage 
Pandu, were to us like our fathers. 

12. Now that best of men (Pandu), 
having gone to heaven, Dhritarashtra can 
not bear these princes, his sons. 

13 We can not sanction this. therefore 
leaving this excellent city and our houses, 
we shall go to the place where Yudhishthira 
is going. ’ 

14. The king of virtue, Yudhishthira, 
reflected for some time, and then addressed 
in sorrow the citizens who were talking thus 
in grief, 

15. “ The king of the world (Dhritarashtra) 
is our father, (he is) worthy of our regard, 
(he is) our preceptor and our superior. It 
is our duty to accomplish with auspicious 
mind whatever he commands. 


16. You are our friends ; walking round 
us and making us happy with your blessings, 
return to your homes. 

17. When the time comes for anything 
to be done for us by you, then accomplish 
all that is agreeable and beneficial to us. M 

18. Having been thus addressed, the 
citizens walked round the Pandavas and 
offered them their blessings. They then 
returned to the city. 

19. When the citizens had left (the 
Pandavas), Vidura, learned in all the 

! precepts of virtue, thus spoke to the 
eldest Pandava in order to warn him 
(of his danger.) 

20. The learned man (Vidura) con¬ 
versant with the (Mlecha) Jargon, spoke 
thus to the learned man (Yudhishthira), also 
conversant with the (Mlecha) jargon (in 
that Mlecha jargon),— M He who knows the 
schemes of others (enemies) according to the 
dictates of political science, knowing it, 
should act in such a way as to avoid all 
dangers. 

21. He, who knows that there are sharp 
weapons capable of cutting the body though 
not made of iron, and understands also the 
means of warding them off, can never be 
injured by the enemy. 

22. He lives who protects himself by the 
knowledge that neither the consumer of 
straw and wood nor the drier of dews burns 
the inmates of a hole in the deep forest. 

23. The blind man sees not his way, (for) 
the blind man has no knowledge of direction. 
He who has no firmness never acquires 
prosperity. Knowing this, keep yourself 
always alert. 

24- The man, who takes a weapon 
(which is) not made of iron (and which is) 
given him by his enemy, can escape from 
fire by making his house like the hole of 
a jackal. 

25. By travelling a man may know the 
ways, and by the star he can ascertain the 
derection. He that keeps his five (senses) 
under control can never be oppressed by his 
enemy. 1 ' 

26. Having been thus addressed, the 
king of virtue, the son of Pandu. Yudhishthira, 
thus replied to (hat foremost of learned men, 
the illustrious Vidura, 

27. "I have understood you.' Vidura, 
thus having instructed the Pandavas, walked 
round them, and bidding them farewell, re¬ 
turned to his house. 

28. Vidura, Bhishma and cit^ens having 
gone back, Kunti came to Ajatsatru 
(Yudhishthira) and spoke thus. 



212 MAHABHARATA. 


29. “ What Khattwa {Vidura) said to 
you in the midst of many people, so indis¬ 
tinctly as if he said nothing, and what you 
said similarly (in reply) is not understood 
by us. 

30. If it is not improper for us to know 
it, I desire to hear all that passed between 
you and him." 

Yudhishthira said 

31. The virtuous Vidura said to me that 
I must know that the house (at Varanavata) 
is made of inflammable materials. (He 
further said) the way of escape will also be 
known to you." 

1 32. He told me, “ The man who is self- 
controlled wins (the sovereignty) of the 
whole world." I replied to Vidura, “ I have 
understood you." 

Vaishampayana said 

3^. The Pandavas started for Varana¬ 
vata on the eighth day of the month of 
Falguna when the star Rohini was ascen¬ 
dant ; and arriving there they saw the town 
and its people. 

thus ends the hundred and forty seventh 
Section , the arrival at Varanavata , in the 
Jatugriha of the Adi Parva. 


Section C X L VIII- 

(J ATUGRI HA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

I—2. Hearing that the sons of Pandu 
were coming, all the citizens came speedily 
by thousands, out of the town of Varanavata 
with joy, on various conveyances, taking with 
them all the auspicious things as directed 
by the Sastras in order to receive those best 
of men. 

3. Coming to the sons of Kunti, the 
citizens of Varanavata surrounded them and 
blessed them by uttering the word Joy a 
(victory). 

4. Being thus surrounded by them, that 
best of men, the king of virtue, Yudhishthira, 
looked as effulgent as the thunderer (Indra) 
in the midst of the celestials. 

5. Being welcomed by the citizens, and 
welcoming them in return, those sinless ones 
(the Pandavas) entered the populous and 
ornamented Varanavata. 

6. Entering the town, O king, those 
heroes first went to the houses of the 
Brahmanas engagedyin their proper duties. 

7. Then those best of men went to the 
hofises of the officials in charge of the town ; 
then they went to the houses of the cari- 


warriors, then to those of the Vaisyas, and 
then even to those of the Sudras. 

8. O best of the Bharata race, thus adored 
by the citizens, the Pandavas went to their 
house with Purochana walking at the head 
(of the procession.) 

9. Purochana gave them first class food 
and drink, beds and carpets and seats. 

10. Being served by Purochana and 
adored by the citizens, they (the Pandavas,) 
attired in costly robes, lived there. 

11. When they had lived there for ten 
nights, Purochana spoke to them about the 
house, called “ Blessed," though really (it 
was) unblessed. 

12. Thereupon those best of men, attired 
in (costly) garments, entered that house at 
the request of Purochana, as Guhyakas enter 
(those jin the Kailasha (mountain). 

13. Inspecting that house, that foremost 
of ail virtuous men, Yudhishthira, said to 
Bhimasena that the house was made of in¬ 
flammable materials. 

Yudhishthira said 

14. O chasister of foes, from the smell of 
fat, and Ghee mixed with lac, it is evident, this 
house is made of inflammable materials. 

15—16. By the help of trusted and well- 
skilled artizans, the enemies have nicely built 
this house with hemp, heath, straw, and 
bamboo, all soaked in Ghee . The sinful 
Purochana desires to bum me after in¬ 
spiring me with confidence. 

17. The wicked man, therefore, lives 
here, obedient to (the instruction of) Duryo- 
dhana. The greatly intelligent Vidura 
knew this danger. therefore, O son of 
Pritha, he told me of it beforejiand. Know¬ 
ing this, that well-wisher of ours, 

18. The younger brother of our father, out 
of affection for us, has told us about this 
house, so full of danger and constructed by 
the wretches under Duryodhana (who is) 
acting secretly (from behind.) 

Bhima said 

19. If this house is known to you as in¬ 
flammable, then let us go to the place where 
we lived first. 

Yudhishthira said:— 

20. I think we should rather live here, 
seeming unsuspicious, but we must remain 
very cautious and keep our senses wide 
awake, and at the same time we must 
seek for some means of escape. 

21. If Purochana finds from our demea¬ 
nour that we have learnt his design, he 
may suddenly bum us to death by taking 
ra mediate steps. 



ADI PASVA. 


22 . Purochana cares very little for ob¬ 
loquy and sin. The wretch lives here in obe¬ 
dience to (the instructions) of Duryodhana. 

23. If we are burnt, will grandfather 
Bhishma be angry ? Why would he make 
the Kurus angry with him by showing his 
anger. 

24. It may be that if we are burnt, our 
grandfather Bhishma and other best men of 
the Kuru race may be indignant for the 
sake of virtue. 

25. If we fly from this place from the fear of 
being burnt, Duryodhana, covetuous for 
kingdom, will surely bring about our death 
by means of spies. 

26—27, The wicked Duryodhana has 
rank, power, friends,tallies and wealth, but 
we have none. He can certainly destroy 
us by adopting many means. Deceiving 
this wretch and that wretch also, let us live in 
disguise for some time. 

28. Let us lead a life of hunting, wan¬ 
dering over the earth. We shall then be 
awhre of all the paths that exist for escape. 

29. We shall dig in all secrecy, this very 
day a subterranean passage in our room. 
If we can keep it secret from others, fire 
will not able to consume us. 

30. therefore we shall live here (and act 
•in such a way) as Purochana and the citizens 
of Varanavata may not know what we are 
doing. 

thus ends the hundred and forty eighth 
Section , the coloquy of Bhima and Yudhis - 
thira , in the Jatugrika of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXLIX. 

(JATUGRIHA) Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O king, a friend of Vidura, a person 
well-skilled in mining, came and spoke thus 
to the Pandavas in private. 

2. "1 have been sent by Vidura; I am 
well-skilled in mining. Tell me what fa¬ 
vourite works of the Pandavas I shall per¬ 
form, 

3. He trusts me and has said to me 
in private, “Go to the Pandavas and accom¬ 
plish their good. What can I do for 
you ? 

4. Purochana will set fire to the door 
of your house on the night of the fourteenth 
day of the black fortnight. 

5. The desire of the wicked-minded Dhri- 
tarastra’s son (Duryodhana) is to bum the 
best of men, the Pan Javas, with their mother. 


213 

6. O Pandava, something was told to 
you by Vidura in the Mlecha language, and 
you too replied in that language. I tell you 
this as a credential.” Yudnisthira, the truth¬ 
ful son of Kunti, thus spoke to him. 

Yndhisthira said 

7—8. O amiable one, I now know you as 
a dear and trusted friend of Vidura, true 
and ever devoted to him. There is no 
necessity (of ours) which that learned man 
(Vidura) does not know. 

9. As you are his, so you are ours. Do 
not make any difference between him and 
us. We are as much yours as his. Protect 
us as that learned man (Vidura) protects us. 

10. 1 know this inflammable house was built 
for me by Purochana at the command 
of the son of Dhritarashtra (Duryodhana). 

11. That sinful, vicious and wicked- 
minded man, commanding wealth and allies, 
pursues us always (with his persecutions). 

12. Save us with exertion from the im¬ 
pending conflagration. If we are burnt to 
death, the desire of Duryodhana will be ful¬ 
filled. 

13. Here is that wicked man's well- 
stocked arsenal. This large house has 
been built abutting the high walls of the 
arsenal, without haviag any out-let. 

14. This most cursed device which wa$ 
made (for our destruction) was known to 
Vidura, and I was told of k by him, 

15. The danger that Khattwa (Vidura) 
saw beforehand is now at our door. Save 
us from this without the knowledge of Puro¬ 
chana. 

V aishampay ana raid 

16. The miner promised to do it by 
saying “Be it so”; and he began with care 
the work of excavation, and he (soon) made 
a subterranean passage. 

17. He made that subterranean passage 
in the centre of the house. O descendant 
of Bharata, it was in a level with the floor 
and closed up by doors (planks). 

18. For the fear of Purochana, its month 
was thus covered. He (Purochana) kept a 
constant watch at the gate of the house. 

19. O king, they the (Pandavas) lived 
in the night in it with arms reacly for us^; 
and in the day they hunted from forests to 
forests. 

20. thus lived they yery guardedly, 
deceiving Purochana with a show of trust¬ 
fulness and contentment while in reality 
they were trustless and discontented. 



214 


MAHABHARATA. 


21. The people of the city also did not 
know anything of these plans (of the Pan- 
davas). Except the friend of Vidura, that 
good miner, none else knew any thing. 

thus ends the hundred and forty-ninth ' 
Section , living in the lac-house , in the 
Jatugriha of the Adi Parva . 


Section C L. 

(JATUGRIHA) Continued. 

V&ishampay&na said 

1. Having seen them living cheerfully and 
without suspicion for a full year, Purochana 
became exceedingly glad. 

2. Seeing Purochana in that state of 
mind, the virtuous son of Kunti, Yudhishthira, 
thus spoke to Bhima, Arjuna and the twins 
(Nakula and Sahadeva). 

Yudhishthira said 

3. The cruel-hearted and sinful Puro¬ 
chana thinks us very trustful, and he has thus 
been well-deceived. I think (therefore) that 
the time for our escape has come. 

4. Setting fire to the arsenal, burning 
Purochana to death and leaving six bodies 
here, let us escape from this place, un¬ 
observed by any. 

Vaishampayana said 

5. On the occasion of an alms-giving, 
Kunti fed on a certain night a large number 

-of Brahman as. There came also a number 
of ladies. 

6. O descendant of Bharata, they ate and 
drank ard enjoyed themselves as much as 
they pleased. And they all returned 
home with the permission of Madhavi 
(Kunti.) 

7. Impelled by fate, a Nishada woman 
with her nve sons came there with the desire 
of obtaining food, and she enjoyed herself 
there at pleasure. 

8—9. She drank wine and became 
drunk and incapable with her sons. O 
king, she with her sons slept in that house 
more dead than alive. O king, when all 
the people fell asleep, a violent storm began 
to blow on that night. 

10. Bhima then set fire to the house 
where Purochana was asleep; then the 
Pandava set fire to the door of that lac- 
house. 

11. Then he set fire to that house in 
several places. When the sons of Pandu 
were satisfied that the house had caught fire 
in all parts, 


12. Those chastisers of foes, then 
speedily entered the subterranean passage 

| wi^h their mother. Thereupon the intense 
heat and the great roar of the fire 

13. Awakened the people of the city ; 
and seeing the house ablaze, they said 
in sorrowful face. 

The citizens said 

14. The wicked-minded (Purochana) 
built this house to destroy the relatives of 
his employer under the instructions of tho 
Duryodhana, and he has (now) set fire to it. 

15. Fie on Dhritarashtra, whose under¬ 

standing is so partial ! He has burnt to 
death the heirs of Pandu, as if they were his 
enemies ? , 

16. The wicked-minded, and sinful 
(Purochana), who has burnt those best of 
men (the Pandavas) innocent and unsuspici¬ 
ous, has himself been (also) burnt to death 
as fate would have it. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

17. thus-bewailed the citizens of Vama- 
vata. Surrounding the house, they remained 
for the whole night there. 

18. The Pandavas however with their 
sorrowful mother came out of the subter¬ 
ranean passage and fled unobserved in haste. 

19. Those chastisers of foes, the Panda¬ 
vas, on account of sleeplessness and ftar, 
could not proceed with speed with their 
mother. 

20. O king of kings, Bhimasena, en¬ 
dued with great speed and power, took 
upon his body his mother and all his 
brothers. 

21—22. The greatly strong and ener¬ 
getic Vrikodara took his mother on his 
shoulder, the twins on his sides, and the two 
sons of Pritha, his brothers (Arjuna and 
Yudhishthira) on both hi9 arms. He broke 
the trees by his breast and pressed the earth 
with his feet. He thus marched on. 

thus ends the hundred and fifty Section , 
the burning of the lac-house t in the Jatu¬ 
griha of the Adi Parva. 

Section CLI . 

(J ATUGRIH A)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. In the meanwhile, the learned 
Vidura sent to that forest a man of pure 
character whom he much trusted. 

2. He went to the place where he was 
directed to go ; and he saw the descendants 
of Kuru, the sons of Pandu, with theze 



ADI PARVA. 


25 


mother, measuring the depth of the water of 
a, river in the forest, 

3. The design of the wicked-minded 
(Duryodhana) was made known by this spy 
to the high-souled and greatly learned 
Vidura. 

4. therefore that learned man was sent 
by Vidura, and that person showed to the 
sons of Pritha a boat, as swift as mind or 
wind, 

5. With mechanism and flags, made 
by trusted artificers and capable of with¬ 
standing wind and waves. It was on the 
banks of the holy Bhagirathi. 

6. He said these word to show that he 
was really sent (by Vidura). (He said), M O 
Yudhishthira, listen to what the learned 
(Vidura) said to you. 

7. • Neither the consumer of straw and 
wood, nor the drier of the dews bums the 
inmates of a hole in the forest. He escapes 
from death who protects himself.’ 

8. By these credentials know me to have 
been sent by Vidura and also to be his 
trusted agent. Khattwa (Vidura,) learned in 
the precepts of all religions, told me also, 

9. O son of Kunti, that you shall surely 
defeat in battle Karna, Duryodhana with 
his brothers and Shakuni. 

10. This boat is ready on the waters. 
It will glide pleasently on. It will surely 
carry you away from these regions.” 

11. Seeing those best of men with their 
mother pensive and sad, he made them 
get on the boat that was on the Ganges. 
Going with them himself, he again said :— 

12. “Vidura, having smelled your heads 
and embracing you, has said it again and 
again that in commencing your auspicious 
journey, and going alone, you should never 
be careless.” 

13. O king, having said this, the man 
sent by Vidura took those heroes, those best 
of men, to the other side of the Ganges on 
his boat. 

14. Having taken them over the waters 
and seen them all safe on the opposite 
bank, he uttered the word Java (Victory), 
and blessing them he went back to the place 
whence he came. 

15. The illustrious Pandavas also, send¬ 
ing some message to the learned (Vidura,), 
and having crossed the Ganges, proceeded 
in haste and in great secrecy, being un¬ 
observed by all. 

thus ends the hundred and fifty first 
Section , the crossing the Ganges , in the 
Jatugriha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CLII. 

(JATUGRIHA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. When the night had passed away a 
large number of the people of the city came 
there to see the sons of Pandu. 

2. Those men extinguished the fire and 
saw that the house was made of lac, and that 
the counsellor Purochana had been burnt 
to death. 

The citizens said:— 

3. Indeed this sinful act was contrived 
bv the wicked Duryodhana to destroy the 
sons of Pandu. 

4. There is no doubt that the son of 
Dhritarashtra (Duryodhana) has burnt to 
death the heirs of Pandu, with the full know¬ 
ledge of Dhritarashtra, else he would have 
been prevented (by his father). 

5. Indeed, the son of Shantanu (Bhishma,) 
Drona, Vidura, Kripa and other Kurus 
have not followed the dictates of duty. . 

6. Let us (now) send words to the wicked- 
minded Dhritarashtra,—(saying), “Your 
great desire is fulfilled ; you have burnt to 
death the Pandavas.” 

Vaishampayana said 

7. They then began to extinguish the 
fire to find out the Pandavas. They saw 
the Nishada woman burnt to death with her 
five sons. 

8. The miner, while removing the ashes, 
covered with it the hole he had dug in such 
a way that it remained unnoticed by all who 
had gone there. 

9. The citizens then sent words. to 
Dhritarashtra to inform that the Pandavas 
along with counsellor Purochana had been 
burnt to death. 

10. Hearing the great evil news of the 
death of the sons of Pandu, the king 
Dhritarashtra bewailed in great sorrow. 

Dhritarashtra said 

11. King Pandu, my illustrious brother, 
has (indeed) died to-day, when those heroes 
(the Pandavas) with their mother have been 
burnt to death. 

12. O man, go quickly to the city of 
Varanavata and perform the funeral rites of 
those heroes and of the daughter of the 
king of Kunti (Bhoja). 

13. Let also the bones of the deceased 
be sanctified by the usual rites, and let all 
the beneficial and great acts be performed. 
Let the friends ana relatives of those that 
have been burnt to death also go 1 here. 



2X6 


MAHABHARATA. 


14. I vet also all other beneficial acts that 
ought to be performed by us for the Panda- 
vas and Kunti be accomplished by spending 
wealth. 

VaUhampayaHa feaid 

15. Having said this, the son of Ambika, 
Dhritarashtra, surrounded by his relatives, 
offered oblations of water to the manes of 
the sons of Pandu, 

16. Being greatly afflicted with sorrow, 

he wept with all others! (saying,) 44 O 
Yudhishthira! ” 44 O descendant of Kuru !” 

others cried, 44 O Bhima ! 

17. Others again, “O Falguni!” some 
again, <4 0 the twins !" 44 0 mother Kunti!" 
i ney thus bewailed and gave oblations of 
water. 

18. The other citizens also bewailed for 
the Pandavas. But Vidura did not bewail 
much, for he knew the truth. 

19. Leaving the city of Varanavata, 
the gteatly strong Pandavas, altogether six 
in number with their mother, reached the 
/iver Ganges. 

20. Aided by the strength of arms of the 
boatmen and by the rapidity of the current 
and favourable wind, they then speedily 
reached the opposite bank. 

21. They then left the boat and proceeded 
towards the south, finding their way in the 
dark by the light of the stars. 

22. O king, after much suffering, they 
at last reached a dense forest. The sons of 
Pandu became tired, thirsty and sleepy. 

23. Yudhishthira thus spoke to the greatly 
energetic Bhimasena, “VVnat could be more 
painful than our being in a dense forest ! 
We do not know the directions; we are incap¬ 
able of proceeding further. 

24. We do not know whether the sinful 
Purochana has or has not been burnt to 
death. How shall we escape from these 
dangers unobserved by others ! 

25. O descendant of Bharata, take us on 
you again and proceed as before. You alone 
amongst us are strong, and (you are) as swift 
as wind." 

26. Having been thus addressed by the 
king of virtue (Yudhishthira), the greatly 
strong Bhimasena took his brothers and 
Kunti (on his body) and walked on. 

thus ends the hundred and fifty second 
chapter, the escape of the Pandavas, in the 
Jatugrihu cf the Adi Parva. 


Section CLIII. 

(JATUGRIHA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayna said 

1. By the force of that mighty (heroe's) 
breast, the forest with its trees and their 
branches appeared to tremble. 

2. The motion of his thighs raised a wind 
like that of the month of Jaista and Ashara. 
The greatly strong (Bhima) made a road 
for himself by treading down the trees and 
creepers. 

3. He proceeded on, breaking the kings 
of the forest (big trees) and the plants with 
their flowers and fruits that stood on his 
way. 

4. thus breaking large trees angrily goes 
through the forest the leader of a herd of 
elephants of sixty years of age, the liquid 
juice (at the season of rut) trickling down 
the three parts of his body. 

5. So great was the force with which 
Bhima, endued with the speed of Garuda or 
Maruta, proceeded that the Pandavas seem¬ 
ed to be fainted. 

6. By the strength of his arms, be swam 
across many streams difficult to be crossed f 
and they (the Pandavas) disguised them¬ 
selves from the fear of the sons of Dhrita¬ 
rastra. 

7. He carried his delicate and illustrious 
mother on his back over even and uneven 
grounds on the banks of rivers. 

8. O best of the Bharata race, in the 
evening he reached a fearful forest where 
fruits and roots and water were scarce, and 
(which was) full of terrible roars of birds 
and beasts. 

9. The twilight became fearfully dark and 
(the roars of) birds and beasts (grew) fiercer. 
All sides became invisible, (being covered 
with darkness). A strong wind began to 
blow. 

10. It broke and laid low many large 
and small trees and many creepers with 
fruits and dry leaves. 

11. Those descendants of Kuru (the 
Pandavas), afflicted with fatigue and thirst 
and heavy wkh sleep, were unable to proceed 
further. 

12. They then sat down in that great 
forest without food or water, and Kunti, 
afflicted with thirst, then spoke thus to her 
sons, 

13. 44 I am the mother of the five Pandavas 
though I am now in their midst, yet I am 
burning in thirst l" She repeatedly said 

I this to her sons. 



ADI PARVA. 


217 


14. Having heard this, Bhimasena’s 
heart was Warmed with compassion from 
the affection (he bore) for his mother, and he 
began to proceed again, 

15. Then Bhima, entering a large feai%- 
ful and terrible forest, saw a beautiful banian 
tree with wide-spreading branches. 

16. Placing them all there (under the 
tree), that best of the Bharata race, (Bhima) 
said, “0 lord, rest here ; I shall go to bring 
water. 

17. I hear the sweet notes of the water 
fowl Sarashas. I think there must be a big 
lake (somewhere here.") 

18. O descendant of Bharata, commanded 
by his eldest brother who said, “Go,” he went 
there where the aquatic Sarashas were. 

19—20. O best of the Bharata race, 
ever affectionate to his brothers he went for 
the sake of his brothers. He drank water 
and bathed there in that lake ; he brought 
water for them by soaking his upper gar¬ 
ment. O descendant of Bharata, retracing 
his way with all speed, over four miles he 
came to his mother and began to sigh 
like a snake in sorrow and grief. 

21. Seeing his mother and brothers asleep 
on the ground, Vrikodara was greatly afflict¬ 
ed with grief and lamented thus, 

22. 14 Alas I what more painful sight can 
1 see than what I see now, my brothers sleep¬ 
ing on the ground ! O unfortunate am I ! 

23. They who could not formerly sleep 
at Varanavata on the softest and costliest 
bed are now asleep on the bare ground! 

24. The sister of that chastiser of foes, 
Vasudeva, the daughter of the king of 
Kunti (Bhoja), Kunti, endued with all auspi¬ 
cious marks, 

25. The daughter-in-law of Vichitfavirya 
and the wife of the illustrious Pandu and 
the mother of us (the Pandavas), resplendent 
as the filament of lotus 

26. Delicate and tendei 4 , fit to sleep on 
the costliest beds, is now asleep as she could 
never do on the bare ground 1 

27. She, who has given birth to these sons 
by Dharraa, Indra, Maruta ; and who has 
ever slept in palaces, is now asleep on the 
ground from fatigue ! 

28. What more painful sight shall I - 
ever see than what 1 see (now), the best of 
men (the Pandavas) sleeping on the (bare) 
ground l 

29. The ever virtuous (Vudhisthira) who 
deserves to be the king of the three worlds, 
now sleeps on the ground, fatigued and tired 
like an ordinary being. 

28 


30. Ayrurta of the colour of the blue 
ocean who is matchless among men sleeps 
on the ground like ordinary mortals. What 
could be more painful than this ! 

31. The twins, who are handsome as the 
Ashwinis among the celestials, are aslesp on 
the ground like ordinary men! 

32. He who has no jealous and wicked 
minded relatives lives like a single tree in a 
village. 

33. Where there is only one tree full of 
leaves and fruits in a village, it becomes 
sacred and is worshipped and venerated by 
all. 

34. They, who have many relatives, 
who are heroic and virtuous, live happily 
in this world without any sorrow of any 
kind 

35  Being powerful, growing in pros 
perity and making their friends and rela 
tives happy, they live depending on one 
another like the trees of the forest 

36. We are banished by the wicked- 
minded Dhritarashtra and his sons, and we 
escaped for our good fortune from a fiery 
death 

37. Having escaped from that fire, we 
are now resting under this tree. Having 
suffered great afflictions, where are we now 
to go ? 

38— 4 °- O foresightless sons of Dhrita 
rastra, O wicked men, enjoy your success. 
The gods are certainly favourable to you 
Because Yudhishthira does not order me, 
(to kill you) therefore, O wretched men, live 
till then. Else angry as I am, I would 
have even this very day sent you 
(Dufyodhana) with your Sons and ministers 
and with Karna and the son of Suvata 
(Shakuni) to the land of the dead. What 
can 1 do, so long the king (Yudhishthira) is 
not angry 

41 O Vicious men, the eldest of the 
Pandavas, Yudhishthira, is a virtuous-minded 
mart.’ Having said this, the mighty-armed 
(Bhima), his mind infiahimed with wrath, 

42. Squeezed his palms and sighed with 
a sorrowful mind. Like an extinguished fire 
blazed Up, again in sorrowful mind, 

43. Vrikodara saw his brothers sleeping 
like ordinary men in trustfulness on the 
ground. Then Bhima thought, 

44. 44 1 think there are Some towns not far 
off from this forest. We ought to remain 
awake here. But they are all asleep ; there 
fore I myself will Sit awake. 

45. When they will rise after having 
been refreshed by sleep, then they wilt quenen 



213 


mahabharata. 


their thirst.’ 1 Having resolved this, Bhima 
sat awake. 

thus ends the hundred and fifty third 
chapter, the fetching of water by Bhima, in 
the Jatugriha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CL1V 

(H 1 DIMBA-BADHA PARVA.) 

Vaishampayana said:— 

I. Not far from the place where they (the 
Pandavas) slept, there was a Rakshasha, 
named Hidimbi, living on a Sola tree. 

2—4. (He was) greatly energetic and 
powerful, black as the clouds of the rainy 
season, hungry and eager for human flesh, of 
cruel and terrible vissage, of long shanks and 
large belly, of locks and beard, red in colour, 
of shoulder broad as the neck of a large tree, 
of ears like arrows, and of features frightful 
and hideous. When casting his glance at 
pleasure all around (the place), he saw the 
great car-warriors, the sons of Pandu. 

5. Ugly-featured, red-eyed, fearful and 
terrible, looking, hungry and thirsty he 
looked around at pleasure, and he saw them 
in that state. 

6—7. Yawnning westfully, shaking his 
dry and grizzly locks pointed upwards, and 
scratching them with his fingers, the large 
mouthedconnibal repeatedly looked at the 
sleeping sons of Pandu. Of huge body 
and great strength, of complexion like a 
mass of clouds, of teeth long and sharp- 
pointed, of face emitting a sort of lustre, he 
was ever pleased with the human food. 

8. Smelling the scent of man, he spoke 
thus to his sister, 14 It is after along time 
that my most favourite food has come 
to me. 

9. My tongue is moist with saliva in 
anticiparting the relish of such food. My 
eight teeth are sharp-pointed and incapable 
of being resisted by anything. 

10. 1 shall dip them into the most deli¬ 
cious meat. Attaching the human throat and 
(human) artei ie also, 

11. I shall drink a plentiful quantity of 
hot, fresh and frothy blood. Go and ascer¬ 
tain who these (men) are, lying asleep in this 
forest. 

12. The strong scent of man pleases my 
nostrils. Killing aU these men, bring them 
to me. 

t3. They are asleep in my dominion. 
There is no fear for you. Tearing a plenti¬ 
ful flesh from these men, 


14. We shall then both eat (the meat). 
Do my bidding soon. Eating to our fill the 
flesh of these men, 

15. We shall dance together to various 
tunes.” Having been thus addressed by 
Hidimba in the forest, Hidimba, 

16. The female Rakshasha, went at the 
command of her brother, O best of the 
Bharata race, to the place where the Panda¬ 
vas were. 

17. Going there she saw the Pandavas 
with Pritha asleep and the invincible 
Bhimasena sitting awake. 

18. Seeing Bhimasena who resembled a 
Sola tree and who was matchless in beauty, 
the Rakshashi was filled with desire. 

19. She thought,— 44 His colour is like the 
heated gold ; he is mighty-armed, he is 
leonine shouldered, he is greatly effulgeot, 
he is conch-necked, and he is lotus-eyed, h^ 
is fit to be my husband. 

20. 1 shall not obey the cruel commands 
of my brother. A woman’s love for her 
husband is greater than that of her brother. 

21. If I kill him, my brother's and my 
leasure will be momentary, but if 1 do not 
ill him, I shall forever enjoy with him.” 

22. She was capable of assuming any 
form at will. She assumed an excellent 
human form and came slowly to the mighty- 
armed Bhimasena. 

23. Being decked with celestial orna¬ 
ments, she came to Bhimasena in bashful 
demeanour and with smiles on her lips. She 
said, 

24. 4l O best of men, whence have you 
come here and who are you ? Who are these 
celestial-like men that are asleep here ? 

25. O sinless one, who is this delicate 
lady of transcendent beauty sleeping so 
trustfully here in this forest, as if she is in 
her.own house? 

26. Do you not know that this dense 
forest is the abode of Rakshasha. Here 
dwells the wicked-minded Rakshasha, named 
Hidimba. 

27. O celestial-like man, I have been 
sent here by my brother, that Rakshasha, 
with the cruel intention of eating your flesh. 

28. 1 tell you truly that seeing you as 
effulgent as a celestial, I do not aesire any 
body else to be my husband except you. 

29. O learned man in all the precepts of 
virtue, do to me what is proper. My heart 
and body are both pierced by Kama (god of 
love). I am desirous of making you mine ; 
make me yours. 

30. O mighty-armed hero, I shall rescue 
you from the Rakshasha who eats human 



ADI PARVA. 


flesh. O sinless one, become my husband. 
We shall live on the breasts of mountains. 

31. I can travel in the sky, and I do so 
at pleasure. You may enjoy with me incom- 
parable pleasure in those places/’ 

Bhima said 

32. O Rakshashi, like a self-controlled 
Rishi, who can leave his mother, elder and 
younger brothers, sleeping happilv (here 7 ) 

33. What man like me would leave his 
sleeping mother and brothers as food for a 
Rakshasha in order to gratify his lust? 

The Rakshashi said 

34. Awake them all. I shall do what is 
agreeable to you. I shall rescue you all 
from my cannibal brother. 

Bhima said:— 

35. O Rakshashi, for the fear of your 
wicked-minded brother, 1 shall not awaken 
my mother and brothers, sleeping comfort¬ 
ably in the forest. 

36. O timid girl, the Rakshashas are 
never able to withstand my prowess. O 
beautiful-eyed one, no man, no Gandharva 
and no Yaks ha (can also withstand it.) 

37. O amiable girl, go or stay or do 
what you like, or O delicate shaped lady, 
send your cannibal brother (to me.) 

thus ends the hundred and fifty fourth 
chapterythe coloquy of Hidimba and Bhima , 
in the Hidimba-baaha of the Adi Parva. 


Section C L V 
(HIDIMBA-BADHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Vaish&mpayana said 

1. Seeing her delay (in returning), the 
king of the Rakshashas, Hidimba, got down 
from the tree and came where the Pandavas 
were. 

2. (He was) of red eyes and strong arms, 
of standing hair and large mouth, of colour 
like clouds, of sharp teeth and fearful ap¬ 
pearance. 

3. Seeing this frightful creature alight 
from the tree, Hidimba became alarmed 
and thus spoke to Bhimasena, 

4. ‘The wicked-minded cannibal is com¬ 
ing in anger. Do with your brothers what 
I ask you. 

5. O hero, endued as I am with the prowess 
of Rakshashas, I am capable of going any 
where at will. Get upon roy hips ; I shall 
carry you through the sky 


21Q 

6. O chastiser of foes, awake your 
mother and others, sleeping in comfort. 
Taking them all, I shall go through the 
sky.” 

Bhima said 

7. O lady of fair hips, fear nothing. I 
am certain that so long I am here, there is 
no Rakshasha who can harm any of these 
(men). O lady of slender waist, 1 shall lull 
this (cannibal) before your very sight. 

8. O timid girl, this worst of Rakshashas 
is not a worthy antagonist of mine,—nay all 
the Rakshashas can never withstand my 
great prowess in battle. 

9. Behold my arms each like a trunk of 
an elephant. (Behold) my thighs like two 
iron dubs. (Behold) my chest, broad and 
adamantine. 

10. O beautiful girl, you shall see to-day 
my Indra-like prowess. O lady of fair hips 
do not consider me weak, thinking that I 
am a human being. 

Hidimba said 

11. O best of men, you are like a celes¬ 
tial. I do not consider you weak. But 1 
have seen the prowess that Rakshashas exert 
on men. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

12. O descendant of Bharata, the angry 
cannibal the Rakshasha heard these words of 
Bhima thus talking there. 

13. He saw Hidimba in human form, 
her head decked with garlands of flowers 
and her face like the full moon ; 

14. Her eyebrows, nose, eyes and ringlets 
were all of the handsomest description,ana her 
nails and complexion were of the most deli¬ 
cate colour. Sne was decked with all kinds 
of ornaments and attired in fine transparent 
robes. 

15. Seeing her in that charming human 
form the cannibal thought that she was lust¬ 
ful, and became (very) angry. 

16. O best of the Kurus, becoming angry 
with his sister, the Rakshasha expanded his 
large eyes and thus spoke to her, 

17. “What foolish creature throws obs¬ 
tacle on my way when I am hungry; O 
Hidimba, have you become so senseless as 
not to fear my anger ? 

18. O unchaste woman, fie on you ! You 
do me an injury out of lust! You are ready to 
sacrifice the honours of all the chief Raksha¬ 
shas, your ancestors! 

19. I shall kill you with all those for 
whose sake you are trying to do me‘a great 
injury.” 



440 


MAHABHARATA. 


20. Having addressed Hidimba thus, 
Hidimba with red eves, his teeth pressing 
against teeth, ran at h it with the intention 
©? killing her. 

21. Tb« best of all weildfers of weapons 
Bhima, seeing him rush at her, reproached 
him by saying “stop, stop. M 

aa. Seeing the Rakshasha angry with 
his sister, Bhimasena smiled (in scorn), and 
spoke thus, 

23. “O Hidimba, why do you awaken 
these (men) sleeping in comfort ? O wicked- 
minded (Rakshasha), come to me first with¬ 
out loss of time. 

24. Smite me first; you should not kill a 
woman, specially when she has been sinned 
against instead of sinning. 

25. This girl is not in her own control in 
becoming lustful towards me. She has been 
moved by the god of love who pervades 
every living form. 

26—27. O wicked creature, O you the 
most infamous of your class, your sister came 
here at your command. Seeing my person, she 
desires me. The timid girl has done you no 
harm. It is the fault of the god of love, and 
therefore you should not injure her. 

28. O wicked wretch, you should not 
kill a woman when I am here. O canni¬ 
bal, come with me (to a distance) and fight 
singly with me, 

29. I shall singly (fight with you) and 
send you to-day to the land of the dead. 
O Rakshasha, your head will be pounded to 
pieces, being pressed by my strength, 

30—31. As if pressed by the tread of a 
mighty elephant. When you will be killed by 
me in battle your body will be to-day torn 
by hawks, herons and jackals, in glee. I 
shall in a moment make this forest free of 
all Rakshashas, so long polluted by you by 
eating men. 

32. O Rakshasha, your sister will see to¬ 
day that I shall drag you, huge though you 
are like a mountain! as a lion drags an ele¬ 
phant, 

33. O worst of Rakshashas, when you will 
be killed by me, men frequenting this 
forest will five safely and without fear. 


Hidimba said:— 

34. O man, what is the need of your this 
vaunting and boasting? Accomplish all 
this first, and then you may vaunt. therefore 
do not make any delay. 


33, You know yourself to be strong and 
endued with prowess. In your encounter 
with me to-day, you shall now rightly know 
what is your (real) strength. 


36. I shall not kill these (your brothers) 
till then. Let them sleep at their pleasure. 
O foolish man, I shall first kill you who 
speaks such evil words. 

37. After drinking your blood, I shall then 
kill these (your ^brothers), and then kill this 
(my sister) who has done me an injury. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

38. Having said this, the cannibal, out¬ 
stretch ingp his arms, ran in great wrath to¬ 
wards that chastiser of foes, Bhimasena. 

39. The greatly powerful Bhima soon 
seized the extended arms (of the rushing 
Rakshasha) with great force, as if in 
sport. 

40. Then seizing the struggling Rakshasha 
with violence, Bhima dragged him away 
from that place full thirty two cubits, as a lion 
drags a small deer. 

41. Thereupon the Rakshasha, becoming 
angry, clasped the Pandava Bhima with 
great force, and he sent forth a terrible 
yell. 

42. The greatly strong Bhima then drag¬ 
ged him again (further away) with (great) 
force, so that his comfortably sleeping 
brothers might not awake by his yell. 

43. Clasping and dragging each other 
with great force, both bhimasena and 
Hidimba displayed their great prowess. 

44. Fighting like two large elephants 
mad with rage, they broke down the trees 
and tore off the creepers that grew around. 

45. By the great noise (of the fight) those 
best of men (the Pandavas) woke up with 
their mother, and they saw Hidimba sitting 
before them. 

thus ends the hundred and fifty fifth 
Section , the fight between Hidimba and 
Bhinta , in the Hidimba~badha of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section CLVI. 
(HIDIMBA-BADHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Rising from sleep, those best of men 
(the Pandavas) with their mother were filled 
with astonishment on seeing the extraordi¬ 
nary beauty of Hidimba. 

2. Thereupon being astonished with her 
beauty, Kunti slowly addressed in sweet 
orders and gave her all assurance. 

3. “O celestial-like beautiful maid, O 
beautiful one, who and whose are you ? For 
what business have you come here and from 
what place have you come ? 



ADI PARVA. 


1321 


4. Are you the deity' of this forest or 
(are you) an Apsara ? Tell me all why you 
are sitting here.” 

Hidimba said 

5  The blue cloud like great forest 
that you see is the abode of mine and that 
of my brother, Rakshasha Hidimba. 

6. O amiable lady, know me as being 
the sister of the Rakshasha chief. O res¬ 
pected madam, I was sent by my brother to 
kill you with your sons. 

7. Coming here at the command of that 
cruel-mindea (Rakshasha), I saw your 
greatly powerful son of the colour of pure 
gold. 

8. O blessed lady, I was brought under 
the control of your son by the god of love 
who pervades the nature of every thing. 

9  I then chose your greatly powerful 
son as my husband. though I tried to 
suppress this passion, 1 could not. 

10. Finding my delay, the cannibal, 
came in person here to kill all these your 
sons. 

11. But he has been dragged away by 
your illustrious and intelligent son and my 
(chosen) husband. 

12. Behold the man and the Rakshasha, 
both endued with great strength and prowess, 
(now) engaged in combat, pressing each 
other with great force and filling the whole 
region with their roars. 

Vaishampayana said 

13. Hearing her these words, Yudhishthira, 
Arjuna, Nakula and the powerful Sahadeva 
hastily rose up. 

14. They saw those two (Bhima and 
Hidimba) already engaged in fight; they 
were dragging each other, (both) eager to 
overcome each other like two greatly strong 
lions. 

15. They clasped and pressed each other 
again and again. The dust of the earth 
rose like f the smoke of the forest-fire. 

16. Covered with the dust of the earth, 

they, who were like mountains looked like 
two cliffs enveloped in mists. % 

17. Seeing Bhima oppressed by the 
Rakshasha, Partha, Arjuna, slowly said with 
smiles on his tips, 

18. m O Bhima, O mighty-armed (hero), 
fear nothing. We did not know that in the 
fight with the terrible Rakshasha you are 
tired. 

19. O son of Pritha, i stand here to help 
you. I shall kill the Rakshasha. Nukula 
and Sahadeva will protect our mother. 


Bhima said 

20. Look on this combat with uncon¬ 
cern. You need not take part in it. When 
he has come to my clutches, he will not 
escape with life. 

Arjuna said 

21. O Bhima, what need is there to keep 
this wicked Rakshasha alive any longer? 
O chastiser of foes, we are to go from this 
place as soon as possible; and Uierefore we 
can stay here no longer. 

22. The east is reddening; the morning 
twilight is about to set in. At Raudra 
Muharta (just at the break of day), the 
Rakshashas become most powerful. 

23. O Bhima, be quick. Do not play 
(with him); kill the fierce Rakshasha. He 
can display Maya delusions, hereafter. 
therefore, show the strength of your arms. 

Vaishampanya said:— 

24. Having been thus addressed by 
Arjuna, Bhima blazed up in anger. He 
summoned the strength that Vahu puts forth 
at the time of the universal dissolution. 

25. He quickly raised up the cloud-like 
Rakshasha in anger and he then whirled him 
one hundred times. 

Bhima said» 

26. (O Rakshasha), yeur body has in 
vain grown and thriven on unsanctified 
meat. Your intelligence is in vain, your 
sense is in vain. You deserve, therefore, 
an unholy death. I shall reduce you to-day 
to nothing. 

28. I shall make this forest blessed 
to-day, O Rakshasha, completely shorn of 
prickly plant (which you were in it); so that 
you shall no longer kill men in order to eat 
them. 

Arjuna gaid:— 

28. If you think it a heavy task to kill 
the Rakshasha in battle, let me assist you. 
Kill him without (any further) loss of 
time. 

29. O Vrikodara, let me kill him alone. 
You are tired and you have almost finished 
the work, and you well deserve rest (now). 

Vaishampanya said 

30. Having heard these words (of Arjuna) 
Bhimasena was inflamed with rage; and 
dashing him on the ground with all his 
might, he killed him like a beast. 

31.. When he was thus killed by Bhima, 
he sent forth a terrible ro^g like the sound of 
a wet dRuru which filled the whole forest. 



2 22 


MAHABHARATA. 


32. Then the strong son of Pandu 
(Bhima), holding the body with his hands, 
broke it in the middle, and the mighty- 
armed hero greatly pleaded the Pandavas 
(by his this great deed). 

33. Seeing Hidimba slain, they were 
filled with joy and lost no time to congra¬ 
tulate that best of men, that chastiser of 
foes, Bhitrasena. 

34. thus congratulating the illustrious 
and greatly powerful Bhima, Arjuna thus 
again addressed Vrikodora, 

35. "O lord, I believe there is a town not 
far off from this forest. O blesssd one, let us 
soon go from this place, so that Duryodhana 
may not trace us. 

36. Those best of men (the Pandavas), 
those great car-warriors, saving, “ Be 
it so," proceeded with their mother. And 
Rakshashi Hidimba also (followed them.) 

thus ends the hundred and[fifty-sixth 
chapter, the killing of Hidimba, in the 
Hidimba-badha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CLVII. 
(HIDIMBA-BADHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Bhima laid 

1. The Rakshashas revenge themselves 
on their enemy by alluring deceptions. 
therefore, O Hidimba, go to the way that 
your brother has gone. 

Yudhishthira said 

2. O best of men, O Bhima, do not kill 
a woman even in anger. O Pandava, the 
attainment of virtue ts a higher duty than 
the protection of body. 

3. You have killed the greatly powerful 
(Rakshasha) who came with the purpose of 
killing us. She is (but) his sister,—what 
can she do to us, even if she is angry ? 

4. Thereupon, Hidimba respectfully 
saluting Kunti and Yudhishthira with joined 
hands, spoke to Kunti thus, 

5. "O respected lady, you know the 
pangs that women suffer from the god of 
love. O blessed lady, I have received 
those (pangs) by Bhima. 

6. i have suffered these great pangs and 
I wait for the time (when it will be assuaged). 
That time has now come, when I expect 
that my happiness would come. 

7. O blessed lady, leaving my friends, 
relatives and religion, 1 have chosen this best 
of men, this sen of yours, as my hnsband. 


8. O illustrious lady, if forsaken by this 
hero and yourself, I shall not live any longer, 
I tell you this truly. 

9. O greatly beautiful lad>, you should 
show compassion towards me, considering 
me foolish or very obedient to you. 

to. O greatly fortunate lady, unite roe 
with my husband, your son. Let me go away 
at pleasure (wherever I like), taking this 
celestial-like (hero). Trust me, O Messed 
lady, I shall bring him back to you all. 

11. Whenever you will think of me, 
I will immediately come to you and carry 
you wherever you will command. I shall 
rescue you from danger over even and 
uneven grounds. 

12. I shall carry you on my back when¬ 
ever you will desire to proceed with speed. 
Be gracious to me and make Bhimasena 
accept me. 

13. It is consonant with the precepts of 
religion that one should protect his life by 
any means. He, who seeks to do it, should 
not scruple about the means. 

14. He who keeps his virtue (even) in 
distress is the foremost of all virtuous men. 
Distress is the greatest danger to virtue and 
virtuous men. 

15. It is virtue that protects life, and 
therefore virtue is called the giver of life. 
The means by which virtue is secured can 
never be censurable. " 

Yudhishthira said 

16. O Hidimba, there is no doubt of that 
what you say is true. O lady of slender 
waist, you must act as you have said (you 
want to do.) 

17. O blessed lady, when Bhimasena 
will finish his ablutions, twilight prayer and 
the usual propitiatory rites you will then be 
adored by him till the sun sets. 

18. O lady of mind-like speed, sport 
with him at pleasure during the day. You 
must always bring Bhimasena back every 
night. 

Vadshampayana said 

19. ^Having promised to do it by saying, 
“ Be it so”, Bhima said (to Hidimba), 
“ O Rakshashi, listen to the agreement that 
1 make with you. 

20. O blessed lady, O lady of slender 
waist, I shall go (and stay) with you, so 
long you do not obtain a son." 

21. Having promised this by saying, 
"Be it so,” the Rakshashi Hidimba took 
Bhima upon her body and went up to the 
sky. 



AD! PARVA. 


22 3 


22—23. Assuming the handsomest form, 
decked with all ornaments and pouring 
forth at times sweet music, she sported 
with the Pandava (Bhima) on the mountain 
peaks of picturesque scenery and in regions 
sacred to the celestials, abounding with 
beasts and birds, 

24. Also in forests, and mountain fast¬ 
nesses, overgrown with blossoming trees, 
in beautiful lakes resplendent with lotuses 
and lilies, 

25. On islands of rivers, on the pebbled 
banlts of streamlets, in sylvan streamlets 
with beautiful banks, and also in mountain 
streams, 

26. In beautiful woods with blossoming 
trees, in the Himalayan bowers, and in 
various mountain caves, 

27. In the crystal water of the lakes, 
smiling with lotuses, on the shores of the 
sea shinning with gold and pearls, 

28. In beautiful towns and fine gardens, 
in woods sacred to the gods, and on tke 
breasts of hills, 

29. In the land of the Guhakas and 
the hermitages of the ascetics, on the banks 
of the Manasha lake, abounding with fruits 
and flowers of every season. 

30. Assuming the handsomest form, she 
sported with the Pandava (Bhima). The 
lady with the mind-like speed sported 
with Bhima in these places. 

31. She then gave birth by Bhima a 
greatly strong son, of terrible eyes and large 
mouth, of ears like arrows and of ap¬ 
pearance fearful, 

32. Of roaring voice, of lips brown as 
copper, of teeth sharp and keen. He was 
mighty-armed, greatly energetic, exceed¬ 
ingly powerful and a great car-warrior. 

33—34. Having long-nose, broad chest, 
frightfully swelling calves, celerity of motion 
and excessive strength, he had nothing 
human in him, though born of a man. 
He excelled all the Pichashas and other 
such creatures and also the Rakshasas. 

35. He grew up to be a youth when he 
was a boy, and that mighty hero soon 
acquired high proficiency in all arms and 
weapons known amongst mankind. 

36. The Rakshasha women give birth 
on the very day they conceive ; they are 
capable of assuming any form at will, and 
they change their forms (at will). 

37. That bad featured child, that mighty 
bowman, soon after his birth, bowed down 
to his mother and also to his father and 
touched their feet. They then named him. 


38. His mother said, 11 This child's 
head is like a Ghata (water-pot)." They 
then gave him the name of Gatatkacha. 

39. Gatatkacha was (very much) atta¬ 
ched to the Pandavas. He became a great 
favourite with them,—almost one of them. . 

40. Knowing that the period of her stay 
with the (Pandava) had come to an end, 
Hidimba making another agreement with 
them went away wherever she liked. 

41. That best of Rakshashas, Gatat¬ 
kacha, promising to come when required 
for business, went away towards the north. 

42. That great car-warrior (Gatatkacha) 
was created by the illustrious Indra as a 
proper antagonist of Karna of matchless 
power in consequence of the weapon (he 
gave him). 

thus ends the hundred and fifty-seventh 
Section , the birth of Gatatkacha , in 
Hiaimba-badha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLVIII. 

(HIDIMBA-BADHA PARVA)— contd. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

1. O kii.g, those mighty car-warriors 
the heroes (the Pandavas), went from forest 
to forest, killing many beasts. In course of 
their travel and they crossed many forests 
(came to) 

2. The countries of the Matsyas, Tri- 
gartas, and Panchalas, then to that of the 
Kichakas, where they saw masiy beautiful 
woods and lakes. 

3. They all made matted locks and 
wore the barks of trees. Those illustrious 
(heroes) assumed the form of ascetics with 
their mother. 

4. Those car-warriors some times pro¬ 
ceeded in haste, carrying their mother, (on 
their back) sometimes they proceeded -slowly; 
they then went in great haste. 

5. They studied the Brahma (Rik) and 
the Vedas and the Vedangas and all other 
sciences of morals. (When they were thus 
engaged), they saw their grandfather 
(Vyasa). 

6. Having respectfully saluted the illus¬ 
trious Krishna Dwaipayana those chastisers 
of foes with their mother stood before him 
with joined hands. 

Vyasa said 

7. O best of the Bharata race, I knew 
beforehand of your this affliction,—your this 
unjust banishment by the sons of Dhrita- 
rastra. 



24 


MAHABHARATA. 


8. Knowing this, I have come to do 
you some great good. You ought not to 

neve. Know all this is for your (future) 
appiness. 

9. There is no doubt that you and they 
all are equal in my eyes; but men love 
more those that are in misfortune or in 
tender years. 

10. therefore my love for you is now 
greater (than before), and in consequence 
of that love, I wish to do you some good. 
Listen to me. 

11. Not far from this place there is a 
beautiful town which is a safe place for you. 
There live you all in disguise, waiting for 
my return. 

Vaish&mpayana said 

12. Having thus comforted them, the 
son of a Satyavati, Vyasa, led them to (the 
town of) Ekachakra. The lord (Vyasa) 
comforted Kunti also. 

Vyasa said 

13. O daughter, live. Your this son, 
the illustrious and the best of men, Yudhis- 
thira, ever deveted to virtue, conquering 
the world by his virtue will virtuously rule 
over all the kings of the world. 

14. Conquering the whole earth bounded 
by the belt of the sea by the prowess of 
Bhima and Arjuna, there is no doubt (he 
will rule the whole world.) 

15. Your sons and those of Madri, 
ah great car- warriors, will sport in their 
own Kingdom at pleasure. 

16. Conquering the whole world, these 
best of men will perform Rajshuya and 
Ashwameda and other sacrifices in which 
Dakshina (presents to the Brahmanas) will 
be very large. 

17. Maintaining their friends and re¬ 
latives in luxury and affluence, these your 
sons will rule over the kingdom of iheir 
forefathers. 

Vaishamp&yana said 

18. Having said this, he took them to 
the house of a Brahmana, and then Rishi 
Dwaipayana spoke thus to the eldest 
Pandava, 

19. u Wait here for me. I shall come 
back to you. You will be able to obtain 
great happiness by adopting yourself to the 
place and time (in which you are now.)” 

20. O king, they all said with joined 
bands, " Be it so." (Thereupon) the illus¬ 


trious lord, the Rishi Vyasa, went away 
from whence he came. 

thus ends the hundred and fifty-eighth 
Section t the meeting with Vyasa , in the 
Hiaimba-badha of the Adi Parva . 

Section CLIX. 
(VAKA-BADHA PARVA.) 

Janamejaya said 

1. O best of the twice-born, what did 
the Pandavas, those great car-warriors, 
the sons of Kunti, do when they went to 
Ekachakra ? 

V aishampay ana said 

2. These great car-warriors, the sons of 
Pandu, going to Ekachakra, lived for a 
short time in a Brahmana’s house. 

3—4. O king, they saw many beauti¬ 
ful woods and countries, rivers and lakes, 
as they roamed about begging their bread. 
On account of their many accomplishments 
they became (great) favourites of all men. 

5. They offered to Kunti every night all 
the food (that they got during the day}, and 
it (the food) was divided (by Kunti) and 
they each ate separately the share of each. 

6. Those heroes, those chastisers of foes, 
with their mother, ate half (of the food 
collected, the greatly strong Bhima aJone 
ate the other half. 

7. O best of the Bharata race, the illus¬ 
trious men thus passed some days in that 
country. 

8. One day, when those best of men 
went out for food, BVima (alone) was (at 
home) with Pritba (his mother). 

9. O descendant of Bharata, Kunti heard 
loud and heart-rending lamentations in the 
house of the Brahmana. 

10. O king, seeing them weeping and 
piteously lamenting, she could not bear it 
from her compassion and from her goodness 
of heart. 

11. Being sorry in mind, the amiable 
Pritha spoke to Bhima these words full of 
compassion. 

12. “ O son, our grief being gone we 
were happily living in this Brahmana’s 
house, unknown to Dhritarasra's son, and 
much respected by him. 

13. O son, I always think what might be 
ood for the Brahmana, and what good 
can do to him, as men who live in othersj 

house (ought to) try to do." 







AD! PARVA. 


22$ 


14. O child, he is truly a man who pays 
back the benefit received. Such an act is 
never destroyed. One should do more 
(good) than others do him. 

15. This Brahmana has certainly fallen 
into a great distress. If we can be of any 
help to him (in his present distress), we 
should by (some-what) repay his services. 

Bhima said 

16. Learn what distress and from what 
cause that distress has befallen him. 
Having learnt it, I shall try to remove it 
(hisdistress), however difficult its achievment 
may be. 

Vaishampayana said 

17. O king when those two (Runti and 
Bhima) were thus talking, they heard a cry 
of sorrow proceeding from the Brahmana 
and his wife. 

18. As the Kamadhenu (the all-boon¬ 
giving cow) runs at her tethered calf, so 
Kunti ran in all hurry to the inner appart- 
ment of the high-souled Brahmana. 

19. She saw there the Brahmana, his 
wife, his son and his daughter, all sitting 
with cast-down faces. 

The Brahmana said 

20. Fie on the life in this world which is 
hollow as the reed. It is full of misery ; it 
is a slave to others ; it is based on great 
sorrow. 

21. To live is to suffer great misery ; to live 
is to suffer great diseases. Life is certainly a 
record of sorrows. 

22. The soul is one, but it has to serve 
Dharma, Artha and Kama. By simultaneous
pursuit of these three, great misery is 
occasioned. 

23. Some say salvation is our highest 
object of attainment, but it can never be 
attained. The acquisition of wealth is hell ; 
it is attended with misery. 

24. Great misery is for those that desire 
wealth, greater for him who has (already) 
acquired it. Great affection is engendered 
on the acquired wealth ; and when it goes 
away, the misery is great. 

25. I do not see by what means I can 
escape from this danger and how can I fly 
away (from this place) with my son and 
wife ? 

26. O Brahmani, (wife), remember, I tried 
to go to some other place where we could 
be happy, but you did not listen to my 
words. 

27. When I repeatedly asked you to go, 
you, O foolish woman, said, “ I am born 


here ; I have grown old here ; this is my 
ancestral homestead.’ 

28. Your father is dead, your old mother 
died long ago. Your friends and relatives 
are also dead,—why do you (then) dpsire 
to live here ? 

29. From your affection towards your 
relatives and friends, you did not then listen 
to my words. The great misery for the 
loss of a relative and friend has now come to 
us. 

30. Oh, how can I bear it? The time 
has come for my own death. I shall not be 
able to live like a cruel wretch by abandoning 
my own relatives and friends. 

3t. You are always my help-mate in all 
virtuous acts, you are like a mother to me. 
The gods have given you to me as my friend ; 
you are my chief stay. 

32—34. You were made by my parents 
as a partner of my domestic life ; you are 
nobly-born, and of good disposition ; you 
are a mother of children ; you are ever 
devoted to me ; you are innocent, ever 
constant to your vows ; you have chosen and 
wed me in due rites,—how can I abandon you 
for the sake of saving my own life ? How 
shall I be able to abandon my own son ? 

35 — 3 ^ (He is) a child of tender years, 
having no beard (yet on his chin). How shall 
I sacrifice my daughter whom I have begotten 
myself, who has been given to me by the 
illustrious creator for bestowing her on a 
husband, and through whom I am to enjoy, 
along with my ancestors, those regions attain¬ 
able by those only who possess daughter's 
sons. 

37. Some men think that father's affec¬ 
tion for his son is greater; pothers (think 
that father’s affection) for his daughter (is 
greater); but mine is equal. 

38. How can I abandon the innocent 
girl upon whom rests the region of eternal 
bliss and my own lineage and perpetual 
happiness ? 

39. If I sacrifice myself and go to the 
other world, I shall still be reperttent, for 
being abandoned by me, they would not be 
able to live. 

40. To abandon any of these (my wife 
son or daughter) will be a cruel and most 
wicked act. If I sacrifice myself, they will 
(also) die without me. 

41. The distress into which I have fallen 
is great ; I do not know the means of 
escape (from it). Alas ! What means shall 
I adopt with my friends and relatives! It 


29 



WMMiBHARATA. 


is (better Jfhat I shojuid die with then ; I am 
unable to live (any longer). 

thus ends the hundred and forty-ninth 
Section , the lamentations of the Brahptana, 
in the Vaka-baiha of the Adi Parva. 


Section C LX- 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— contd. 

The Brahnrani said:— 

1. You should not grieve like ordinary 
men. This is not the time lor lamentation. 
You are learned. 

2. All men must die. None should 
grieve for that which is inevitable. 

• 3. Man desires son, daughter and wife 
for himself. therefore abandon grief, for 
ypu are greatly intelligent ; I shall myself 
go there. 

4. It is the highest and eternal duty of 
wqmen,—namely to sacrifice their lives and 
to seel the good of their husbands. 

5. Such an act done by me will give 
you pleasure; it will (also) bring me fame in 
this world and eternal bliss hereafter. 

6. What I speak to you is the highest 
virtue. You can acquire by it (by my sacri¬ 
ficing myself) both virtue and profit. 

7. The object for which one desires a 
wife has already been achieved by you 
from me. I have borne you a daughter 
and a son, by which I have been freed 
from the debt 1 owe you. 

8. You are able to support and protect 
your children. I can not support and protect 
the children as you can (do it). 

9. You are my tife, wealth and lord ; 
having been abandoned by you, how these 
children of tender years, and how myself, 
$an live ? 

10. Being a helpless widow with two chil¬ 
dren of tender years depending on me how 
shall I be able to live leading my life in 
the path of virtue. 

11. How shaH I be able to protect the 

f irl, if your this daughter is solicited by 
ishonoorable and vain persons, unworthy 
of contracting an alliance with you ? 

12. As birds eagerly seek with avidity 
for (the piece of) meat thrown on the ground, 
so men solicit women who have lost their 
husbands. 

13. O best of the twice-born, being soli¬ 
cited by wicked men, I might waver, and I 
might not be able to keep myself on the path 
Of virtue 


14. How shaH I be able to place tins 
only daughter of your house,—this innocent 
girl#—to the (virtuous) way in which her 
ancestors have always walked T 

15. How shall I be able to teach tins 
child (your son) every desirable accomplish¬ 
ment to make him as virtuous as yourself in 
that time of want when 1 shall be helpless 
(without you) ? 

16. When I shall be in such helpless 
state, the unworthy persons will demand this 
orphan girl, like Sudras desiring to hear 
the Vedas. 

17. If I do not bestow this girl, endued 
with all qualities and possessing your 
blood, they may take her away by force as 
cows take the sacrificial Ghee. 

18. Seeing your son (thoroughly) unlike 
yourself, ana your daughter under the con¬ 
trol of unworthy person, 

19. I shall be despised in the world. I 
do not know what will happep to me. O 
Brahmana, there is no doubt I shall certainly 
die. 

20. There is no doubt these children of 
tender years, being bereft of me and you, 
wih die as fish (in a tank) when the water is 
dried up. 

21. There is no doubt the three (myself, 
our son and daughter) will all die without 
you. therefore you ought to abandon me. 

22 . O Brahmana, persons learned in the 
precepts of virtue have said that to prede¬ 
cease their husbands is an act of the highest 
merit for women who have borne children. 

23. I am ready to abandon this son and 
this daughter, these my relations, my this fife 
itself. 

24. To be ever engaged in serving her 
husband is a higher duty to a woman than 
sacrifices, asceticism, vows and various 
charities. 

25. therefore the act .1 desire to perform 
is consonant with the highest virtue. It is for 
your good and for the good of your race. 

26. The virtuous (men) say, that children, 
relatives, wives and all things dear (« 
this world) are cherished for rescuing one¬ 
self from distress. 

27. Man cherishes wealth for (rescuing 
himself) from distress and danger. By 
wealth he cherishes his wife. He must always 
cherish himself both by his wealth and wile. 

28. The wise men have said that wife, 
son, wealth or house is acquired to provide 
for foreseen or unforeseen accidents. 

29. The wise men have said that one's 
all relations, weighed against one's own seif, 
would not be equal to one's own self 



At>r PARVA. 


92f 


. $D. therefore, O respected Sir, accom¬ 
plish your object by me Protect your self 
oy abandoning me. Give me your permis¬ 
sion. Cherish our children 

31. In fixing moralities the men, learned 
i:n the precepts of virtue, have said that 
women should never be killed ; and (they 
have also said) that the Rakshashas are 
learned in the rules of morality. therefore, 
he (the Rakshasha) may not kill me. 

32. It is certain that he will kill a man, 
but it is doubtful whether he will kill a wo¬ 
man. O virtuously learned man, yon ought 
to send me. 

33. I have enjoyed much happiness,' I 
have obtained many things agreeable; I 
have earned much of religious merits; I have 
obtained from you beloved sons ; I do not 
grieve to die. 

34. I have borne children and I have 
grown old; I am ever desirous of doing good 
to you. Having considered all this, I have 
come to this resolution. 

35. O respected Sir, you can take an¬ 
other wife by abandoning me. You may 
be then again placed on the path of virtue. 

36. To marry more than one wife is not 
sin among men. It is very sinful fora woman 
to take a second husband after the first. 

37. Having considered all this, and 
knowing that your self-sacrifice is cen¬ 
surable, save to-day yourself, your race 
and your these two children without loss of 
time. 

thus ends the hundred and sixtieth 
chatter, the words of Brahmani , in. the 
Vaka-hadka of the Adi Parva 


Section CLXI. 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Having heard these words of her 
afflicted parents, the daughter was filled 
with grief, and she thus spoke (to them.) 

The daughter said 

2. Why are you so sorrowful ? Why 
are you weeping, as if you have none. 
Listen to my words, and hearing them, 
do what is proper. 

3. There is no doubt that you will one 
time abandon me by the dictates of virtue. 
Abandon me who am to be abandoned, 
and thus save all by (sacrificing) me 
alone. 

4. Men desire for children hoping, 
they will save them. Cross this stream 
of your difficulty by me. 


5. A child saves his parents in this 
world and in the next. therefore, a child is 
called by the learned Putr. 

6. My forefathers always desire to 
have daughter’s son by me, (to save 
them from hell). I shall mysdf save them; 
by saving the life of my father. 

7. My brother is but of tender 
years; there is no doubt he will cfie sOon 
after your death. 

8. If you, my father, ascend to heaven, 
if my brother dies, t he.Pinda (funeral cake) 
for the Pitris (ancestors) will be stopped, 
and it will be most unfavourite act of tneirs, 

9. Having been abandoned by my father 
brother and also my mother, I shall fall 
from misery to greater misery, and I shall 
finally perish in great distress. 

10. There is no doubt that if you can 
save yourself, my mother and my child- 
brother, also the Pinda will be perpetuated. 

11. The son is one’s own self ; the wife 
is one’s friend; the daughter is (however) 
a source of trouble. Save yourself by 
sacrificing that cause of trouble; and set me 
on the path of virtue. 

12. O father, I am but a girl. Being 
abandoned by you, I shall be helpless and 
miserable, and I shall have to go anywhere 
and everywhere. 

13. I shall, therefore, save my race, and 
I shall acquire the merit that such difficult 
work brings in. 

14. O best of the twice-born, leaving me 
behind, if you go there (to the Rakshasha) 

I shall be very much pained; therefore be 
kind to me. 

15. O excellent man, abandoning me 
who am to be (one day) abandoned, save 
yourself for our sake, for the sake of virtue, 
and your race. 

16. There should not be any delay in 
doing that which is inevitable. What could 
be more painful to us than your ascending 
heaven. 

17. (Then) we shall have to beg our food 
from others like dogs. If you are saved with 
your friends (dear ones), 1 shall pass my 
time in heaven and in bliss. 

18. We have heard that if after bes-. 
towing your daughter, you offer oblations 
to the celestials and forefathers, they wilf 
be propitious to you. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

19. Having heard her these piteous 
lamentations, tne father, the brother and the 
daughter began to weep (together). 



MAHABHARATA. 


2%% 


ao. Thereupon seeing them ail weep, 
their son of tender years, spoke thus in 
childish words, his eyes expanded with joy. 

3 i. He said, u O father, O you mother, 
O sister also, do not weep.” thus saying 
and smiling, he came to each of them. 

33 . Then taking up a blade of grass, he 
said again in joy, “ I shall kill the cannibal 
Rakshasha by it.” 

23. though they were all in grief, yet 
hearing the lisping words of the child, they 
felt exceeding delight. 

34. Thinking that to be the (proper) time 
(to appear before them), Kunti came to 
them and reviving them as nectar revives 
a dead man, she thus spoke (to them). 

thus ends the hundred and sixty first 
Section , the words of the Brahmana's son in 
the Vaka-badha of the Adi Parva, 

Section C X L 11 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— Continued. 

Ennti said 

I. I desire to learn from you what is the 
cause of this grief. Learning it, I shall 
remove it, if it is capable of being removed. 

The Brahmana said 

3. O ascetic lady, what you say is no 
doubt worthy of virtuous men. But this 
grief can not be removed by any human 
being. 

3. A Rakshasha, named Vaka, lives not 
far off from this town. That greatly power¬ 
ful (cannibal) is the lord of this town and of 
this country. 

4. That wicked-minded and powerful 
cannibal, that chief of the Asuras, being 
fattened by (eating) human flesh, rules over 
this country. 

5. This country and town are protected 
by the strength of that Rakshasha; thus 
being protected, we have no fear of any 
enemy,—nay of any living soul. 

6. His remuneration however is fixed to 
supply his food, which consists of one cart 
load of rice, two buffaloes and the man who 
takes them to him. 

7. One after another all (men of this 
town) send him his food. though it is very 
difficult to be kept, yet the turn comes to a 
particular family at intervals of many years. 

8 . If people try to avoid it, the 
Rakshasha then eats them up with their 
wives and children. 


9. There is a king in a place called Vefra- 
heyagriha, but that foolish man does not 
know how to govern (his kingdom) and 
he does not take any step by which this 
country may be rendered safe. 

10. We certainly deserve it all, for we 
live in everlasting anxiety in the kingdom 
of a wretched and weak king. 

11. The Brahmanas can never be made’ 
to live (permanently) in the house of any 
one, (for) they are free men. They depend 
upon their own accomplishments and roam 
(over the world) like a bird,—free to fly at 
pleasure. 

12. It is said that a (good) king should 
be saved first, then a wife and then wealth, 
by the acquisition of the three, one can 
rescue his relatives and sons. 

13 In the matter of the aquisition of 
these three, my course has been (quite) the 
reverse. therefore falling into this danger 
I am suffering great afflictions. 

14. The race-destroying turn of (sup¬ 
plying food to the Rakshasha) has come 
round to me. I shall have to give the food 
and a man as the remuneration of the 
(Rakshasha). 

15. I have no wealth to buy a man. I 
shall not be able to give one who is dear 
to me. 

16. I do not see any means to save 
myself from the Rakshasha; therefore, I am 
plunged into a great ocean of grief, from 
which there is no escape. 

17. I shall to-day with all my family, 
go to that Rakshasha so that, that wretch 
may devour us all at once. 

thus ends the hundred and sixty second 
Section , the question of Kunti , in the Vaka- 
badha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXIII. 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— Continued. 

Ennti said 

I. Do not grieve for this fear, I see a 
means by which you may be saved from the 
Rakshasha. 

3 . You have only one son who is of 
tender years; you have only one daughter, 
who is engaged in vows. I do not like that 
any of these or yourself or your wife should 

go- 

3. I have five sons ; one of them will go 
carrying on your behalf your tribute to 
that sinful Rakshasha. 








ADI PARVA. 


229 


The Brahmana said 

4. I can never do this in order to live. I 
can not cause the death of a Brahmana and 
a guest for saving my own life. 

5. Even those that are lowly born and 
sinful refuse to do this; one should sacrifice 
himself and children for the sake of a Brah¬ 
mana. 

6. I consider this precept best for me, 
and I like to follow it. Between the death 
of a Brahmana and of my own, I would 
prefer the latter. 

7. To kill a Brahmana is a great sin, 
of which there is no expiation. It is best 
for me to sacrifice’myself reluctantly instead 
of sacrificing a Brahmana reluctantly. 

8. O blessed lady, in sacrificing myself, 

I do not commit the sin of self-destruction. 
I shall commit no sin by being killed by 
another. 

9. But if I deliberately kill a Brahmana, 

I shall commit a cruel and sinful act, from 
which I shall never escape. 

10. The learned men have said that the 
abandonment of one who has come to your 
house, or who has sought your protection, 
and the killing of one who seeks death at 
your hands are both cruel and sinful. 

11. The high-souled men, learned in the 
precepts that should be adopted in distress 
and danger, formerly said that one 
should never perform a cruel and censur¬ 
able act. 

12. It is best for me that I should myself 
perish to-day with my wife. I shall never 
cause the death of a Brahmana. 

Kunti said 

13. O Brahmana, my firm opinion is 
that Brahmanas must be protected always. 
If I have one hundred sons, none of them 
would be less dear to me. 

14. But this Rakshasha will not be able 
to kill my son. My son is powerful, ener¬ 
getic and learned in Mantras . 

15. He will reach the food to the'Rak- 
shasha, but he will be able to save himself ; ■ 
this is my firm belief. 

16. I had seen before that many powerful 
and huge Rakshashas came to my 6on and 
were killed at his hands. 

17. O Brahmana, do not by any means 
disclose this to any body ; for then people, 
being curious and desirous of learning (their 
power), will trouble my sons, 

18. The opinion of the learned men is 
that if my son gives this knowledge (to 
others) without the assent of his preceptor, 
he will no longer be able to profit by it. . 


Vaishampayana said 

19. Having been thus addressed by 
Pritha (Kunti), the Brahmana and his wife 
became exceedingly glad and assented to 
those nectar-like words (of Kunti). 

20. Thereupon Kunti and the Brahmana 

went to the son of Anila (Bhima) and told 
him  Do this”; and he replied bv say in P‘, 
' Be it so.” J 7  

thus ends the hundred and sixty-third 
Section , the promise of Bhima to kill Vaka . 
in the Vaka-badha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CLyly. 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— Continued , 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. O descendant of Bharata, when 
Bhima promised by saying, 11 I shall do it,” 
the Pandavas all came there after collecting 
food. 

2. The son of Pandu Yudhishthira learnt 
the affair by |he appearance of Bhima, and 
sitting by his mother, he spoke thus to her 
in private. 

Yudhishthira said:— 

3. What is the work that the greatly 
powerful Bhima wants to perform? Dees 
he wish to do it by your command or of his 
own will ? 

Kunti said:— 

4. By my request the chastiser of foes 
(Bhima) will do this great deed for the sake 
of the Brahmana ana in order to save the 
town (from the Rakshasha). 

Yudhishthira said 

5. What rash aet has been done by you! 
It is a very difficult .work. The learned 
men never praise one's abandonment of 
his own son. 

6. Why do you wish to abandon your 
son for the sake of another's son ? You 
have done this act of abandonment of your 
son which is not approved by both men and 
by the Vedas. 

7. By the strength of whose arms we all 
sleep in comfort and hope to recover the 
kingdom of which we have been deprived 
by the wretches (Duryodhana and others), 

8. Remembering whose great prowess, 
Duryodhana with Shakuni and all others do 
not sleep (for a moment) in the night in 
anxiety; 

9. By whose heroic prowess we were 
rescued from the burning house of lae and 



MMiABHARATA. 


other dangers f by whom Purochana was 
kiUed ; 

10. Relying on whose prowess we be¬ 
lieve ourselves that we have already acquired 
this earth full of wealth and have killed the 
sons of Dhritarashtra. 

11. On what consideration have you 
resolved upon abandoning him ? Have you 
been deprived of your reason ? Have you 
lost your senses on« account of the cala¬ 
mities X 

Kunti said:— 

12. O Yudhishthira, you need not be 
anxious for Vrikodara. I have not resolved 
(to do it) out of any weakness of my under¬ 
standing. 

13. O son, our grief being assuaged, we 
live happily in the house of this Branmana, 
unknown to the Sons of Dhritarashtra and 
much respected by him. 

14. O Partha, I have resolved upon 
doing this in order to requite him, for he 
is a (true) man upon whom good service is 
never lost. 

15. It is' (always) proper that the re¬ 
quital should be greater than the service 
received. Seeing the great prowess of 
Bhima in the house of lac, 

16. And in killing Hidimba, my con¬ 
fidence: on Vrikodara is great. The 
strength of Bhima's arms is as great as 
that of ten thousand elephants. 

17. It was therefore that he was able to 
carry you,—all as heavy as elephants,—from 
Varanavata. There is none so strong as 
Vrikodara ; he may even vanquish in battle 
the thunderer (indra) himself. 

18. As soon as he was born, he fell from 
my lap on the stone. The mass of stone on 
which he fell was broken into pieces by the 
weight of his body. 

itjw OPandava, from that day I have 
cometo know the (great) strength of Bhima. 
therefore, I am desirous of requiting (the 
services) of the Brahmana. 

20. I have not done this from foolishness, 
from ignorance, or from any motive of gain. 
1 have deliberately resolved to do this 
virtuous act. 

an O Yudhishthira, two objects will be 
gained by this act,—one is the requital of the 
Bfahfnfltoa's services (to us) and the other 
is the acquisition of great religious merit. 

22. It is mv opinion that the Kshatriya 
who helps a Brahmana obtains the regions 
of bliss in after life 

23. A Kshatriya, who saves the life of a’ 
Kshatriya, acquires great fame Hi this 
and. in the next world,. 


24. A Kshatriya, who helps a Vaisysr 
on earth, certainly becomes popular among 
men. 

25. The king should even protect a 
S adra who seeks protection. If he does so, 
he is born in his next birth in a royal family, 
possessing property and being adored by 
other kings. 

26. O descendant of Kuru, the illustrious 
and wise Vyasa formerly told me this. 
therefore I am resolved upon doing it. 

thus ends the hundred and sixty fourth 
Section , the coloauy of Kunti and Yudhis - 
thira % in the Vaka-hadha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXV. 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— Continued. 

Yudhishthira said 

1. O mother, what you have deliberately 
done, moved by the compassion for the 
afflicted Brahmana, is indeed excellent. 

2. Because you are compassionate for 
the Brahmana, Bhima will certainly come 
back after killing the cannibal. 

3. But tell the Brahmana that he must 
not do any thing by which the people of 
this town may know all about it. You must 
carefully make him promise it. 

Vaishampayana said 

4. When the night passed away, the 
Pandava, Bhimasena, taking with him the 
food (for the Rakshasha) set out for the place 
where the cannibal dwelt. 

5. Reaching the forest in which the 
Rakshasha lived, the greatly strong Pandava 
(Bhima) began to eat himself the food and 
called loudly the Rakshasha by name. 

6. Thereupon the Rakshasha was in- 
flammed with anger by Bhima's words. He 
came in wrath to the place where Bhima 
was. 

7. Of huge body, of great strength, of 
fierce appearance, with red eyes, red beard, 
red hair, he pressed the earth (as he 
walked). 

8. The opening of his mouth was from 
ear to ear, his ears were like arrows, his 
visage was grim, and his forehead^ farrowed 
into three lines. 

0. Seeing Bhima engaged in eating his 
food the Rakshasha, thus spoke in anger and 
with eyes expanded and lips bitten. 

The Rakshasha said 

10. Who is the fool that desires to go to 
the land of the dead by eating in my very 
sight the food intended for me! 






ADI PARVA. 


Vaighampayana said 

11. O descendant of Bharata, hearing this, 
Bhimasena smiled (in derision), and dis¬ 
regarding the Rakshasha and turning his 
head continued to eat. 

12. Uttering a fearful yell, the canni¬ 
bal rushed on Bhima with two arms raised 
high and with the intention of killing 
Bhimasena. 

13. That slayer of hostile heroes, the 
son of Pandu (Bhima), even then disregard¬ 
ing him and casting on him only a single 
glance, continued to eat the food of tne 
Rakshasha. 

14. Being filled with great displeasure, 
he (the Rakshasha) struck a heavy blow with 
both his hands on the back 01 the son of 
Kunti, V rikodara. 

15. • though Bhima was struck in great 
force with the arms (of the Rakshasha), 
yet he did not even look at him, but he 
continued to eat. 

16. Thereupon he (the Rakshasha) be¬ 
came very angry, tore up a tree and ran 
at the strong Bhima to strike him again. 

17. That best of men, the greatly strong 
Bhima, leisurely ate up all the food, ana 
then washing himself he stood up cheerfully 
to fight. 

18. O descendant of Bharata, the greatly 
powerful Bhima smilingly caught in his left 
hand the tree hurled in anger (by the 
Rakshasha.) 

19. Then that mighty Rakshasha, tear¬ 
ing up various trees, hurled them at Bhima, 
and that Pandava also (hurled) many on the 
Rakshasha. 

20. O great king, the fight between the 
man and the Rakshasha with trees became 
so fearful that the place soon became de¬ 
void of all trees. 

21. Saying that  He is no other than 
Vaka, he sprang upon the Pandava and 
clasped the greatly ppwerful Bhima by both 
his arms. 

22. Bhimasena also clasped the Raksha¬ 
sha by his strong arms. The mighty hero 
began to drag him violently. 

23. Being dragged by Bhima and drag¬ 
ging Bhima also, the cannibal was gradu¬ 
ally overcome with great fatigue. 

24. The earth trembled in consequence 
of their great strength, and large trees that 
stood there were all broken to pieces. 

25. Seeing that the cannibal was over¬ 
come with fatigue, Vrikod&ra pressed him 
down on the earth with his knees, and he 
then began to strike him with great force. 


26—27. Then placing one knee 00 the 
middle of his back, Bhima seized bis neck 
with his right hand and his waiat-cloth with 
his left; he then broke him into two with 
great force. He (the cannibal) then uttered 
a fearful yell. 

28. O Vishampata, then the Rakshasha, 
when he was thus fearfully broken by Bhima,. 
vomitted blood. 

thus ends the hundred and sixty fifth 
chapter, the fight between Vaka and Bhima,. 
in the Vaka-badhfi of the Adi Panto? 


Section CLXVI. 

(VAKA-BADHA PARVA)— Conti, 

Vaighampayana said 

1. Vaka, huge as a mountain, being thus 
broken by Bhima, died uttering fearful 
yells. 

2. O king, terrified by that noise, the 
relatives of that Rakshasha with their atten¬ 
dants came out of their houses. 

3. Seeing them terrified and deprived of 
reason, that best of all wielders of arms, the 
strong Bhima, comforted them and made 
them promise (to give up cannibalism.) 

Bhima said:— 

4. Do not again kill men. If you do it, 
you will be killed like this (Vaka). 

Vaishampayana said 

5. O descendant of Bharata, hearing his 
these words, those Rakshashas gave the 
desired promise by saying 11 Be it so.” 

6. O descendant of Bharata, from that 
day thq people inhabiting that town saw 
the Rakshashas very peaceful towards 
mankind. 

7. Then Bhima took the dead cannibal 
and placed him at one of the gates (of 
the city) unobserved by any. lie then 
went away. 

8. Seeing Vaka killed by Bhima and 
his extraordinary strength, the kinsmen 
(of the RakshAsha) became frightened and 
fled in different directions. 

9. Then Bhima, thus killing him (Vaka), 
returned to the house of the Brahmana and 
described to the prince (Yudhishthira) in 
detail all that had happened. 

10. The next morning the inhabitants of 
the town, in coming out, saw the Rakshasha 
lying dead on the ground, bis body covered 
with blood. 



mahabharata. 


39a 


11. The citizens hair stood on end when 
they saw the tearful cannibal, as huge as a 
mountain cliff. 

12. Going to Ekachakra, they soon 
gave the intelligence; thereupon, O king, 
thousands of the citizens, 

13. Accompanied by their wives both 
young and old,—(all) went there to see 
Vaka. They were all astonished at seeing 
the superhuman feat. O king they began 
to worship the gods. 

14. They then began to calculate whose 
turn was to supply food (to the Rakshasha) 
on the previous day. Ascertaining this, they 
all came to that Brahmana and asked him 
(if he knew any thing about the matter.) 

15. Having been thus repeatedly asked 
by them that best of Brahmanas thus spoke 
to all the citizens in order to conceal the 
Pandavas. 

16. “Seeing me weeping with my friends 
when I was ordered to supply the food (for 
the Rakshasha), a high-minded Brahmana, 
learned in Mantras , saw me. 

• 17. Asking me the cause and knowing 
the calamity that hangs over the town, that 
best of Brahmanas gave me every assurance 
and spoke to me with smiles, 

18. “I shall to-day carry the food to that 
wicked-minded wretch. “ Do not fear for 
me.” He said this 

19. And taking the food, set out for 
the forest where Vaka lived. This deed, 
so beneficial to us, must have been done 
by him. 

20. Thereupon all the Brahmanas and 
Kshatriyas became exceedingly astonished, 
and the Vaisyas and Sudras became ex¬ 
ceedingly glad. 

21. Thereupon all the citizens returned 
to the city after seeing that extraordinary 
feat. The Pandavas also lived there. 

thus ends the hundred and sixty sixth 
chapter, the killing of Vaka , in the Vaka- 
badha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXVII. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA). 

Janamejaya said 

1. O Brahmana, what did those best 
of men, the Pandavas, do alter they had 
killed the Rakshasha Vaka. 

2. O king, after killing the Rakshasha 
Vaka, they hved in the house of that Brah¬ 
mana engaged in the study of the Vedas. 


3. A few days after, a Brahmana df 
rigid vows came to the house of the Brah¬ 
mana in order to live there. 

4. That best of Brahmanas, ever hos¬ 
pitable to hosts, after duly worshipping him, 
in his house, gave him quarters to live. 

5. Then all those, O best of men, the 
Pandavas, with Kunti requested the Brah¬ 
manas to narrate his intersting experiences 

6. He spoke to them of various countries, 
pilgrimages, rivers, kingdoms, many won¬ 
derful provinces and cities. 

7. O Janameiaya, when the narrations 
were over, that Brahmana spoke to them of 
the wonderful Sayantvara of the daughter 
of Jagmasena, the princess of Panchala, 

8. And the births of Dhristadyumna and 
Shikhandi and that of Krishna, born ol 
no woman, in the sacrifice of Drupada. 

9. When he concluded, those best of 
men (the Pandavas) hearing of these ex¬ 
traordinary affairs asked him to narrate 
it in detail. 

The Pandavas said 

10—11. O Brahmana, how did the birth 
of Dhristadyumna, the son of Drupada, take 
place from the (sacrificial) fire? How did the 
wonderful birth of Krishna take place from 
the (sacrificial) altar ? How did (the sons of 
Drupada) learn all weapons from the great 
bowman Drona ? How and for whom and 
for what reason was the friendship between 
Drona and Drupada broken ? 

7aishampayana said 

12. O king, having been thus asked by 
those best of men, the Brahmana narrated 
in detail the account of the birth of 
Draupadi. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy seventh 
Section , the narration by the Brahmana , in 
the Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section c l x vi 11. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

The Brahmana said 

1. There lived at the source of the Ganges 
a great Rishi of rigid vows and great wisdom 
and of severest austerities ; hb name was 
Bharadwaja. 

2. One day when the Rishi came to 
the Ganges to perform hb ablutions, he 
saw the Apsara Gritachi who came before 
him and who row stood there alter her 
ablutions. 



Abl PAfcVA. 


m 


3. A wind rose on the banks of the river 
and made the cloth (of the Apsara) fall from 
her body. Seeing her nude, the Hishl was 
filled with desire. 

4. He was a Brahmachari from his boy¬ 
hood, and (therefore) as soon as his mind 
felt the influence of desire, his vital fluid 
dropped down. The Rishi held it in a 
Drona (Water-pot). 

$. From that pot Was borrt a son, the 
learned Drona, and he studied all the Vedas 
and the Vedangas. 

6. Bharadwaja had a friend, who was a 
king by the name of Prishata. He. had a 
son, called Drupada. 

7. That son of Prishata, that best of the 
Kshatriyas, went daily to the hermitage and 
played and studied with Drona. 

8. After Prishata’s death, Drupada suc¬ 
ceeded him as king. (About this time) 
Drona heard that (Parashu) Rama was 
going to distribute away all his wealth. 

9. Going from the forest, the sort of 
Bharadwaja (Drona) thus spoke to Rama, 
O excellent Brahmana, know me to be 
Drona. I have come for obtaining wealth. 

Hama said:— 

10. O Brahmana, after giving away all 
I have now left ortly nty bddy. Ask from 
me either my body or weapons. 

Drona said:— 

11. Vou should give me all youf weapons 
together with the knowledge of hurling and 
recalling them. 

The Brahmana said :— 

12. Saying “Be it so,” the descendant 
of Brigugave him (the Weapons), and having 
received them, Drona considered himself 
crowned with success. 

13. Obtaining from Rama that great 
weapon called Brahniasira , Drona became 
exceedingly glad and acquired superiority 
over all men. 

14. Thereupon that powerful sort of 
Bharadwaja went to that best of men Dru¬ 
pada and said, 41 Know me to be your 
friend.” 

Drupada said:— 

15 - One of low birth dan never be the 
friend of one whose lineage is pure. He 
who is not a car-warrior can never be the 
friend of one who is j he who is not a king 
can never be a friend one who is. therefore 
why do you desire (to revive) our old friend¬ 
ship ? 


The Brahmana said 

16. Being determined to humiliate thd 
Panchala king that intelligent man (Drona) 
went to the city of Hastinapur, the capital 
of the Kurus. 

17. Thereuport Bhismd, taking with him 
his grandsons with much wealth, offered them 
to the intelligent Droha as his pupils. 

18. With the intention of humiliating 
Drupada, Drona called together all his 
pupils, and he spoke thus to them and to 
the sons of Kunti. 

19. O sinless ones, when you will be 
all experts in arms, you must give me as 
the preceptorial fee that which I cherish in 
my heart.” Arjuna and others said to 
the preceptor, “ Be it so.” 

20. When all the Pandavas became ex¬ 
perts in arms and sure in aim, then Drona 
thus spoke demanding his preceptorial fee. 

Drona said:— 

21. The son of Prishata, Drupada is 
the king of Chatravati. Take from him 
that kingdom and bestow it soon on me. 

The Brahmana said:— 

22. Then the five sons of Pandu defeat¬ 
ed Drupada in battle, and taking him pri¬ 
soner ale ng with his ministers, they offered 
him to Drona. 

Drona said 

23. O king, I again solicit your friend¬ 
ship. He who is not a king should not be 
a friend of a king. 

24. thereforej O Jagniaserla I shall 
divide this kingdom amongst ourselves. 
You will be the king of the country lying 
on the south banks of the Bhagirathi, and I 
shall be that on the north banks. 

The Brahmana said i— 

25. Being thus addressed by the intelli 
gent soil of Bharadwaja, the Panchala 
king spoke thus to that excellent Brahmana, 
that best of all Wielders of arras Drona, 

26. " O high-souled son of Bharadwaja, 
be blessed. Let it be Let there be ever¬ 
lasting friendship between us as you desire / 9 

27 thus addressing each other and 
establishing excellent friendship between 
themselves, Drona and the Panchala king— 
those two chastisers of foes,—went away to 
the place whence they came 

28. The thought of that humiliation did 
not (however) leave the king’s mind for a 
single moment. Being miserable in mind, 
the king wasted away. 

thus ends the hundred and sixty-eighth 
Section , the birth of Draupadi , in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva . 


30 



mahabharata. 


V4 

CH APTER CLXIX. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

The Brahmana said 

1. Sorrowful in mind and afflicted with 
grief, the king Drupada wandered among 
•he hermitages of many Brahmanas,—all 
experts in sacrificial rites. 

2. Afflicted with grief and eagerly de¬ 
sirous of offspring, he daily thought, “ Alas ! 

I have no excellent son.” 

3. He always said in despondency, “ Fie 
tm those children and relatives that l have !” 
He always sighed thinking of revenging 
himself on Drona. 

. 4—6. O descendant of Bharata, even 
after much deliberation, that best of kings, 
(Drupada) did not find any means to over¬ 
come the prowess, the discipline, the train¬ 
ing and the accomplishments of Drona by 
his Kshatriya might. Wandering about, 
the king came (at last) to the hermitage of a 
Brahmana situate on the banks of the holy 
Ganges. There was no Brahmana who was 
not a Snataka and none who was not of 
rigid vows. 

7. There saw that illustrious king two 
(Brahmanas) named Jaja and Upajaja, 
both were of rigid vows, both were self-con¬ 
trolled, and both belonged to the highest 
order. 

8. They belonged to the race of 
Kashyapa, and they were engaged in stu¬ 
dying the Institutes. Those two Brahmana 
Rishis were quite capable of helping the 
king. 

9. Having brought his senses under 
control, he with all earnestness worshipped 
and servod them. Knowing the superiority 
of the younger of the two, 

10. He worshipped in private Upajaja 
of rigid vows, by offering hrm every desired 
object, by serving at his feet and by be¬ 
coming sweet-speeched. 

11. Worshipping him in due form, he 
(Drupada) said to Upajaja, “ O Brahmana, 
if you perform that sacrifice which may give 
me a son who can kill Drona, 

12. O Upajaja, on your doing this,—I 
shall give you ten thousand kine. 

13. O best of Brahmanas, I am ready 
to bestow on you whatever else be in your 
mind and whatever which is agreeable to you. 
There is no doubt about it.” 

14. Having been thus addressed, the 
Rishi replied to him. cannot.” There¬ 
upon Drupada again began to worship and 
serve him, 


15. O king, after the expiration of a 
year, that best of the twice-born, Upajaja, 
spoke thus to Drupada in sweet words, 

16. •• My eldest brother while roving 
in a dense forest took up a fruit that had 
fallen on the ground, not knowing that it 
was unclean. 

17. I was following him, and l saw this 
unworthy act of my brother. He never 
scruples to take impure things. 

18. In taking that foot he did not see 
any impropriety of a sinful nature. One 
who does not observe parity (in one thing) 
is expected not to observe it in other things. 

19. When he lived in the preceptor's 
house reading the Institutes, he used often 
to eat without any scruples in his mind 
the remnants of other people’s food. 

20. He again and again speaks^highly 
of food ; and he has no hatred for any thing. 
Arguing from this I see that lie desires for 
earthly acquisitions. 

21—22. O king, go to him, he will per¬ 
form sacrifices for you.” Having heard those 
words of Upajaja, the king, though he 
entertained a low opinion of Jaja, went to 
his house. Worshipping him who was 
worthy of worship, he thus spoke to him. 
“ O lord, I shall give you eighty thousand 
kine; perform my spiritual actions. I am 
burnt by ray feelings of enmity towards 
Drona. You should cool my heart. 

23. That foremost of men, learned in the 
Vedas, (Drona) is skilled in the Brahma 
weapon. therefore, Drona has defeated me 
in a contest arising out of a quarrel on 
friendship. 

24. The greatly intelligent son of Bha- 
radwaja (Drona) is now the chief preceptor 

f of the Kurus. There is no Kshatriya in 
the world who is superior to him. 

25. His arrows are capable of killing 
every living being, his bow is full six cubits 
long and it looks exceedingly great. 

26. That high-souled great bowman, 
that son of Bharadwaja (Drona,) attired in 
the Brahmanic garb, is destroying the 
Kshatriya might. 

27. lake the son of Jamadagni, Parashu- 
rama, he is engaged in annihilating the 
Kshatriyas. There is no man on earth who 
can overcome the terrible force of his arras- 

28. Like Waring fire fed with Ghec t 
Drona, possessing both the Brahma might, 
and the Kashtrya might consumes every 
. antagonist in-battle. 

29. Your Brahma might is superior to 
his Brahma might, though his is united with 
his Kshatriya migjit. As l am inferior (jn 



ADI PARVA. 2J5 


Drona) in consequence of my having only 
Kshatriya might, therefore, give me your 
Brahma might. 

30—31. As I have got you who is superior 
to Drona in Brahma might, O Jaja, perform 
that sacrifice by which 1 can obtain a son, 
who is invincible and who can kill Drona in 
battle. I am ready to give you ten Kotis 
kine.” Saying, “Be it so,” Jaja recollected 
the various particulars of the sacrifice in 
question. 

32. Knowing the gravity of the matter, 
he asked the assistance of Upajaja who 
coveted nothing. Then Jaja promised to 
perform the sacrifice for the destruction of 
Drona. 

33. Thereupon the great ascetic Upajaja 
spoke to the king (Drupada) all that is re¬ 
quired for the sacrifice from which the king 
was to obtain offspring. 

Upajaja said:— 

34. O king, a son will be born to you who 
will possess, as you desire, great prowess, 
great energy and great strength. 

The Brahmana said 

35. Then king Drupada, being desirous 
of obtaining a son who was to slay the son 
of Bharadwaja (Drona) began to make the 
necessary preparations for the success of 
his wish. 

36. Jaja then poured libations of Ghee 
on the sacrificial fire and ordered the queen 
thus, 44 O queen, O daughter-in-law of 
Prishata, come here a son and a daughter 
have come for you. 

The Queen said 

37. O Brahmana, my mouth is filled 
with suffron and other perfumes ; my body 
bears many sweet scents ; I am not now fit 
for accepting the sacrificial Ghee which would 
give me offspring. O Jaja, wait for me a 
little, for that happy consummation. 

Jaja said 

38. Whether you come or wait, why 
should not the object of this sacrifice be 
accomplished when the oblation has already 
been prepared by me and sanctified by 
Upajaja's invocations! 

The Brahmana said- 

39. Having said this, the sacrificial priest 
(Jaja) poured the sanctified libation on the 
fire, whereupon arose from those flames a 
celestial-like boy. 

40. He was as effulgent as the fire; he 
was terrible to look at; he had a crown on 
his head ; and his body was encased in an 
excellent armour, he had a sword in his 


hand, carried a bow and arrows, and he 
frequently sent forth loud roars. 

41. As soon as he was born, he got on 
an excellent car and went about. There¬ 
upon the Panchalas shouted in great joy 
“ Blessed, blessed.” 

42—43. The very earth appeared to be 
unable to bear the weight of the madly 
joyous Panchalas. “The prince has been 
born for the destruction of Drona. He will 
dispell all the fears of the Panchalas and 
spread their fame. He will also remove the 
grief of the king. M thus said the greatly 
wonderful voice of the sky-ranging beings. 

44. There rose from the (sacrificial altar) 
a daughter, called Panchali, who was bless¬ 
ed with good fortune; she was beautiful,— 
her eyes were smiling and large, 

45. Her complexion \yas dark, her eyes 
were like lotus-leaves, her hair was blue and 
curly, her nails were beautifully carved and 
they were like bright copper,—her eye¬ 
brows were fair, her breasts were rising and 
her thighs tapering. 

46. She was a veritable celestial maiden 
born among men. The sweet fragrance of 
the blue lotus emitted from her body, and it 
was perceptible from a distance of full two 
miles. 

47. Her beauty was such that she had 
no equal on earth. The Devas, the Danavas 
and the YaksUas could desire that celestial¬ 
like beauty. 

48. When this beauty of fair hips was 
born, an invisible voice said, “ This beauty 
of dark complexion will be the best of all 
women, and she will be the cause of the 
destruction of the Kshatriyas. 

49. This lady of slender waist will in 
time accomplish the works of gods. From 
her will arise many fears (dangers) to the 
Kurus. 

50. Hearing this, all the Panchalas ut¬ 
tered a loud leonine roar. The earth was 
unable to bear the weight of the madly 
joyous Panchalas. 

51. The daughter-in-law of Prashita, 
seeing the two (the boy and the daughter) 
and being desirous of getting them, came 
to Jaja and said, 14 Let not these two 
know any one else except myself as their 
mother. 

52. Desiring to do good to the king 
(Drupada) Jaja said, "Be it so.” There¬ 
upon the Brahtaanas whose wishes were 
completely gratified (by presents) gave these 
two (children) names, 

53. (They ^aid,) 44 Because this son of 
Drupada possesses excessive audacity and 
because he has been born like Dyumna 



236 


MAHABHARATA. 


with a natural Armour of weapons, let him 
be called Dhristadyumna. 

54. Because this daughter is dark in 
complexion, let her be called Krishna” 
thus were born the son and daughter of 
Drupada in the great sacrifice. 

55 —56. Then Drona brought the Pan- 
chata prince Dhristadyumna to his own 
house and taught him all weapons as a 
requital of taking the half of the kingdom 
of Drupada. Regarding Destiny to be in¬ 
evitable, the illustrious son of Bharadwaja 
did what would perpetuate his own deeds. 

thus ends the hundred and sixty-ninth 
chapter, the birth of Dhristadyumna and 
Draupadit in the Chaitraratha of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section CLXX. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA )—Contd. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Having heard this, the sons of Kunti 
appeared as if they were pierced with darts. 
Those mighty men lost their peace of 
mind. 

2. Thereupon that truthful lady Kunti, 
seeing all his sons’ minds are in great 
anxiety, thus spoke to Yudhishthira. 

Kunti said : — 

3. We have now lived for many nights 
in the abode of this Brahmana ; we have 
very pleasantly passed in this beautiful city, 
living on the alms of many high-souled 
men. 

4. O chastiser of foes, we have seen 
again and again all the beautiful woods and 
forests in this part of the country. 

5. To see them again would give us no 
pleasure, O heroic descendant of Kuru, 
alms are not so easily obtainable now as 
before, 

6. O blessed one, if you wish to go to 
Panchala, let us go there. O hero, we have 
not seen it before—it must be beautiful. 

7. O destroyer of foes, we have heard 
that alm9 are easily obtainable in Panchala, 
and the king Jagmasena is devoted to 
the Brahmanas. 

8. It is not my opinion that one should 
live long in one place. therefore, O son, 
if you like it is well for us to go there. 

T adhisthira said 

9. That which is your opinion and com¬ 
mand is (always) to our great good. (But) 
I do not know whether my younger 
broth its are willing to go. 


Vaishampayana said 

10. Thereupon Kunti spoke to Bhima^ 
sena, Arjuna and the twins (Nakula andj 
Sahadeva) about the (proposed) journey,! 
and they said, “ Be it so.” 

11. O king, then Kunti saluting the 
Brahmana started for the beautiful city of 
the illustrious Drupada. 

thus ends the hundred and seventieth 
Section , the departure for the Panchala 
country , in the Chaitraratha of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section CLXXI- 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— centd. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

1. When the illustrious Pandavas were 
living in disguise, the son of Satyavati, 
Vyasa, once came to see them. 

2. Seeing him coming, those chastisers 
of foes advanced and bowed down their 
heads and worshipped him. Then they stood 
(before him) with joined hands. 

3. Then they all took their seats at the 
command (of the Rishi), and the Rishi, 
being thus gratified by the sons of Pritha 
living in disguise, cheerfully spoke to them 
thus, 

Vyasa said 

4. 14 O chastisers of foes, are you follow¬ 
ing the path of virtue and scriptures 7 Do 
you worship the Brahmanas 7 You are not 
deficient in giving homage to those that 
deserve homage." 

Vaishampayana said:— 

5. That illustrious Rishi thus spoke 
many words of virtuous import. Speaking 
on various subjects, he again spoke thus. 

Vyasa said:— 

6. There lived in a wood a certain 
illustrious Rishi who had a daughter of 
slender waist, fair hips, fine eye-brows, and 
of all accomplishments. 

7. As a result of her own actions (in her 
previous birth) she became very unfortunate. 
That beautiful chaste girl did not get a 
husband. 

8. Thereupon, she began with sorrowful 
heart to perform austere penances with the 
object of getting a husband. And she grati¬ 
fied Sankara (Siva) by her severe asceticism 

9. The high-souled (deity,) being thus 
gratified, spoke thus to the illustrious girl, 


AD! PARVA. 


37 


4 


• Ask the boon yon desire to have. Be 
blessed ; I am Sankara who is willi lg to give 
you a boon. ” 

10. Being desirous of benefiting herself, 
she again and again said to the supreme 
deity, " Give me an accomplished husband." 

11. Then that foremost of all great 
speakers, Ishana (Siva,) replied to her say¬ 
ing, “ O blessed lady, you will have five 
husbands from among the Bharata princes. ” 

12. Having been thus addressed the 
maiden thus spoke to the deity who gave 
her the boon, “ O deity, O lord, I desire to 
have only one husband through your grace." 

13. The deity addressed her again and 
said these excellent words, u You have said 
five times, “ Give me a husband ” 

14. therefore, you will have in another 
life, what I have said now. ” That celes¬ 
tial like girl was born in the race of Drupada. 
That fautless Krishna, the descendant of 
Prishata, is destined to be the wife of all of 
you (the five Pandavas.) 

15. O greatly powerful heroes, go to the 
city of the Panchalas, and live there. There 
is no doubt you will all be very happy on 
obtaining her as your wife. 

Vaishampayana said 

16. Having said this to the Pandavas, 
that greatly blessed grandfather, that 
great ascet c, after having been saluted by the 
sons of Pritna (the Pandavas) and Kunti, 
went to the place whence he came. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy first 
chapter, the aivice of Vyasa, in the Chaitra - 
ratha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CLXXII . 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contind. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. When the illustrious Vyasa went 
away, those best of men, the Pandavas, 
proceeded with joyous heart, (towards 
Panchala) placing their mother at the head 
(of the procession.) 

2. Those chastisers of foes proceeded in 
a northerly direction in order to reach 
their destination. They walked day and 
night and reached (the several) Shoma- 
srama . 

3. Those best of men, the sons of Pandu, 
came to (the banks of) the Ganges. The 
great car-warrior Dhananjaya (Arjuna) 
walked before, carrying torch in his hand for 
showing them the way and for protecting 
them. 


4. There in the delightful waters of the 
Ganges was sporting in solitude the proud 
king of the Gandharvas (Chitraratha) with 
his wives. 

5. He heard the noise (of the footsteps 
of the Pandavas) approaching the river. 
The greatly strong (Gandnarva) was 
inflamed with wrath by (hearing) the noise. 

6. Seeing there those chastisers of foes, 
the Pandavas, with their mother, and draw¬ 
ing his fearful bow, he spoke thus, 

7—8. “ It is known that excepting the 

first forty labas of the dark twilight that 
proceeds night, (the other portion of the 
night) is set apart for the Yakshas , the 
Ghandharvas and the Rakshashas who are 
capable of going every where at will. The 
rest of the time is set apart for men. 

9. therefore, if any man out of greed 
wander during those moments and come 
near us, both we, (the Gandharvas) and the 
Rakshashas kill those fools. 

10. The men learned in the Vedas dis¬ 
approve (the actions of) those men,—nay 
even of the kings at the head of their armies, 
—who come to any lake or river at such a 
time. 

11. Stay at a distance. Do not come 
near me. Know you not that I am (now) 
bathing in the waters of the Bhagirathi. 

12. Know me to be the Gandharva, 
named Angarparna who depends only on 
his own strength of arms. I am proud and 
haughty; I am the friend of Kuvera. 

13. This my forest on the banks of the 
Ganges is known by the name of Angar¬ 
parna in which 1 sport to gratify myself. 

14. The Kapalikas, the Srtngis or the 
Devas, dare not come here—it appears you 
are human beings. How dare you (then) to 
approach me who is the brightest jewel in 
Ku vera's crown ?” 

Arjuna said 

15. O wretch, to whom can the ocean, 
the sides of the Himalayas, or this river 
Ganges be barred, whether at night or 
day or at twilight ? 

16. O sky-ranger, whether the stomach 
be empty or full, there is no special time te 
come to this foremost of all rivers, the 
Ganges, whether it is night or day. 

17. We are endued with prowess,—we 
care not when we disturb you. O wicked 
being, those men that are incapable (of 
fighting) worship you. 

18. This Ganges, issuing out of the 
golden peaks of the Himalayas, falls into the 
ocean by seven streams. 



MAHABHARATA. 


5 


19. (They are) Ganga, Yamuna, Saras- 
wati, Vitastha, Saraju, Gomati and 
Gandaki. 

20. Those that drink the waters of 
these seven rivers are cleansed of their 
sins. O Gandharva, this sacred Ganga, 
flowing through the celestial regions, is 
called there Alakananda, 

21—22. And in the regions of Pitris, 
it is called Vaitarani, which is not crossable 
by the sinners. Krishna Dwaipayana has said 
that this auspicious and celestial river is 
accessible at all times by all. Why do you 
wish to bar us from it T It is not consonant 
with the eternal virtue. 

23. Why should we not, disregarding your 
words, touch at pleasure the sacred waters 
of the Bhagirathi which is ever accessible 
to all. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

24. Hearing this, Angarpama became 
very angry, and drawing his bow he shot a 
them his arrows whiph were like the poisonous 
snakes. 

25. The Pandava Dhananjaya, who had 
an excellent shield, warded off all. those 
arrows with it and with the torch in his 
hand. 

Arjuna said:— 

26. O Gandharva, seek not to terrify 
those who are skilled in weapons, for weap¬ 
ons hurled at them vanish like froth. 

27. O Gandharva, I know Gandharvas 
are superior to men (in prowess). I shall, 
therefore, fight with you by using the celestial 
weapons. I shall not use delusions. 

28. The fire-weapon tfiat I hurl against 
you wa formerly given by the preceptor of 
Indra, Vrihaspati, to Bharadwaja. 

29. From Bharadwaja it was obtained 
by Agnivisha, and from Agnivisha by my 
preceptor; and that \ excellent Brahmana 
Drona gave it to me. 

Vaishampayana said 

30. Having said this, the Pandava 
(Arjuna) angrily hurled at the Gandharva 
that blazing fire-weapon which immediately 
burnt his chariot. 

31. Having fainted away by the force of 
the weapon, tne greatly powerful Gandharva 
was falling headlong downwards from his 
chariot, 

32. (But) Dhananjaya seized him by the 
hair of his head which was adorned with 

lands of flowers. He dragged towards 
brother that (Gandharva),—insensible 
in consequence of (being wounded by) the 
weapon. 


33. (Seeing this), his wife, named Khum- 
bhinashi, being desirous of rescuing her 
husband, came to Yudhishthira and asked hi; 
protection. 

The Gandharvi said 

34. O exalted one, extend your pro¬ 
tection to me. Set my husband free. O 
Lord, I am a Gandharvi, named Kum- 
bhinashi,—I ask your protection. 

Yudhishthira said 

35. O chastiser of foes, who would kill 
an enemy who has been vanquished in the 
battle, who has been deprived of his fame, 
who is protected by a woman, and who is in¬ 
capable (of defending himself), O child, set 
him free. 

Arjuna said 

36. O Gandharva, take your life. Go 
hence, and do not grieve. The king of the 
Kurus, Yudhishthira orders me to-day to 
show you mercy. 

The Gandharva said:— 

37. I have been defeated by you, there¬ 
fore I shall give up my former name of 
Angarparna. In name only I shall not be 
boastful when really I am not strong in 
prowess like men. 

38. It is a great fortune to me that I 
have obtained a man who wields celestial 
weapons. I am desirous to impart to 
Arjuna the power of illusions of the 
Gandharvas. 

39. My excellent and beautiful chariot 
has been burnt by your fire-weapon. I 
was (formerly) called Chitraratha having a 
beautiful chariot, I shall now be called 
Dagdharatha (having the chariot) burnt. 

40. The science (of illusion) of which 
I spoke to you and which I formerly 
obtained by asceticism will be to-day given 
by me to that illustrious man who has given 
me my life. 

41. What good fortune does he not 
deserve to obtain who after defeating an 
enemy gives him his life when he asks it 
it from him ? 

42. This science is called Chakshushi. 
It was taught by Manu to Soma. Soma 
taught it to Vishwaparbha, Vishwaparbha 
taught it to me. 

43. Having been given by the preceptor 
to one who is a Kapurusha (without energy) 
it went to die out. I have spoken to you 
about its coming (origin and transmission) ; 
listen now to its prowess. 




AD! FARVA. 


44. Whatever you Will desire to see by 
your eyes in this world and whatever its 
nature it will be seen by you (by the help 
of this science). 

45. One can acquire this (science) by 
standing on one leg for six months. I shall 
impart to you this science without your 
observing any vows. 

46. O king, (only) on account of this 
science, we have a superiority over men. 
Because we are capable of seeing every¬ 
thing (by our spiritual eyes), we are equal 
to the celestials. 

47. O excellent man, I desire to give 
ou and your brothers, each separately, one 
undred horses born in the regions of the 

Gandharvas. 

48. They are employed in carrying the 
Devas and the Gandharvas ; they are o? the 
celestial colour, and they possess speed as 
that of the mind. They may be lean and 
thin in body, but they never feel tired, and 
their speed never suffers for this reason. 

49. The thunder was created by Indra 
in the days of yore in order to kill Vitra, 
(but) it broke into a thousand pieces when 
hurled on Vitra’s head. 

50. Thereupon the celestials worshipped 
those fragments of the thunder thus broken 
into pieces. That which is known in the 
world as the wealth of fame is a portion of 
the thunder. 

51. The hands of Brahmanas are (the 
portions of) the thunder; the chariots of the 
Kshatriyas ane (also the portions of) the 
thunder. The charity of the Vaisyas are 
(also the portions of) the thunder, and the 
services of the Sudras are (also the portion 
of) the thunder. 

52. The horses of the Kshatriyas being 
the portions of the thunder, it is said they 
are never to be killed. The portions of the 
chariots (the horses) are the offspring of 
Vadaba. Those amongst them that are 
Suras 

53. Are capable of assuming any colour 
at pleasure, of going any where at will, and 
of running at its owner's will. These horses 
of mine born in the Gandharva region will 
always fullfil your desire. 

Arjuna said 

54- O Gandharva, if you give me out of 
your satisfaction for obtaining life in a crisis, 
these horses and the wealth of science I 
shall not accept it. 

The Gandharva said 

55 A meeting with an illustrious person 
i? always a matter of gratification. Be¬ 
sides you have given me my life. thus 


239 

being pleased With you, i give yeu thd 
science. 

56. O best of the Bharata rdee, O 
Vivatsa, so that the obligation may be not 
only on one side, I shall take from you your 
excellent and eternal fire-weapon. 

Arjuna said 

57. O Gandharva, I shall take your 
horses in exchange of my weapon. Let our 
friendship be ever-lasting. O friend, tell 
me that from which the danger of ours 
(human beings) arises from the Gandharvas. 

58. O Gandharva, we are all chastisers 
of foes ; we are all learned in the Vedas, and 
(we are all) virtuous. Tell us why we were 
censured by you when travelling at night 

The Gandharva said 

59. O sons^pf Pandu, you do not keep 
fire; you have no wives ; you have no Brah¬ 
manas walking before you; therefore yoii 
were censured by me. 

60. The Yakshas, the Rakshashas, the 
Gandharvas, the Pishachas, the Uragas, and 
the Danavas are wise and intelligent. They 
speak much of the Kuru race. 

61. O hero, l have heard from Narada 
and other Rishis the accomplishments of 
your intelligent ancestors. 

62. While roaming over the earth attired 
in her ocean-cloth, I myself have seen the 
great prowess of your race. 

63. O Arjuna, I personally know your 
preceptor, the illustrious son of Bharadwaja 
(Drona), who is celebrated in the Uiree 
worlds for his learning in the Vedas and the 
science of archery. 

64. O best of the Kuru race, O Partha, 

I know also Dharma, Vayu, Indra, Ashwi- 
nis, and Pandu,—these six spreaders of the 
Kuru race. These (six) excellent celestials 
and man are your fathers. 

65—66. Knowing too that you are high- 
souled, you are illustrious, you are the fore¬ 
most of all wieldersof arms, you, all brothers, 
are great heroes, you are virtuous and ob¬ 
servant of vows, your understandings and 
hearts are excellent, and your behaviour 
faultless, I still censured you. 

67. O descendant of Kuru, no man, pos¬ 
sessing strength of arms, ought to bear with 
patience any ill usage before his wife. 

68. O son of Kunti, our strength special¬ 
ly increases at the time of night. As 1 was 
accompanied by my wife, 1 was filled with 
wrath. 

69. O best of all vow-observing men, I 
was vanquished by you in battle ; near from 
me the reasons for which I was discomfi- 
tted. 



240 


MAHABHARATA. 


yo. Brahmacharya is a great virtue, 
you are in it (leading that mode of life). O 
Partha, it is for this that I was defeated by 
you in battle. 

71. O chastiser of foes, if any Kshatriya, 
engaged in the exercise of his desire, fight 
wiUi us at night, he can never escape from 
us with his life. 

72. O Partha, a Kshatriya, engaged in 
the exercise of his desire, may defeat ail the 
wanderers of night (as we are), if he is sancti¬ 
fied by Brahma, and if he assigns the cares 
of his state to his priest. 

73_74, O descendant of Tapati, men 

should, therefore, always employ learned and 
self-controlled priests for the acquisition of 
every good fortune that he desires (to getey. 
That man is fit to be the priest of kings who is 
engaged in the study of the Vedas and their 
six branches, who is pure and truthful, and 
who is virtuous-minded and self-controlled. 

75. That king becomes ever victorious 
(in this world) and obtains heaven in the 
next, who has a priest, who is learned in the 
precepts of morals, who is a master of 
words and who is pure and well-behaved. 

76. The king should always select an 
accomplished priest who can protect what he 
has and acquires what he has not. 

77. He, who desires his own prosperity, 
should ever be guided by his priest; he may 
then acquire the whole earth attired in her 
ocean-cloth. 

78. O descendant of Tapati, a king, who 
is without a Brahmana, can never acquire 
any land by his bravery or nobility of birth 
only. 

79. O spreader of the Kuru race, there¬ 
fore, know that the kingdoms with Brahma- 
nas at their heads can be retained for long. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy second 
Section , the words of the Gandharva , in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXXIII. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Arynna said 

x. You have addressed me as the des¬ 
cendant of Tapati. I wish to know what 
the precise signification of this word is. 

2. O blessed being, we are the sons of 
Kunti, therefore, we are Kaunteyas , but who 
is Tapati that we should be called Tapatyas . 
1 desire to hear about it. 


Vaishampayana said 

3. Having been thus addressed by tfie 
son of Kunti, Dhananjaya, that Gandharva 
narrated the story who is celebrated in the 
three worlds. 

The Gandharva said:— 

4. O Partha, O forerrtost of all intelli- 
ent men, I shall duly narrate to you id 
etail this interesting story. 

5. Hear with attention what I say about 
the reason for which I addressed you as 
Tapatya . 

6. He, who pervades the whole firma¬ 
ment by his light, had a daughter, named 
Tapati,—equal to himself (in effulgence). 

7. That daughter of the Vivashwata 
(Tapati) was the younger sister of Savitri.  
She was icelebrated in the three worlds and 
devoted to asceticism. 

8. There was none equal to her in beauty 
amongst the Deva, the Asura, the Yaksha 
the Raksha, the Apsara, and the Gandhar¬ 
va ladies. 

9. Sh was perfectly semetrical in body 
and faultless in features ; she had black and 
large eyes ; she was attired in beautiful 
robes ; she was chaste and exceedingly well- 
conducted. 

10. O descendant of Bharata, seeing her, 
Vivashwata thought, there was none who 
had beauty, accomplishments, good be¬ 
haviour and learning to be fit for her 
husband. 

11. Seeing that his daughter had attain¬ 
ed the age of puberty and that she was 
worthy of being bestowed on a husband, he 
had no peace of mind, for he always thought 
on whom he should bestow her. 

12. O son of Kunti, that best of the 
Kurus, the son of Riksha, the mighty king 
Sam varan a, worshipped Surya 

13. With due offers of Aryha f garlands 
and scents, with being always pure and holy, 
and with vows, fasts and asceticism of various 
kinds. 

14. The descendant of Puru (Samvarana) 
worshipped the deity, effulgent in all his 
glory, with devotion, humitily and piety. 

15. Thereupon Surya, seeing Samva¬ 
rana, learned in the precepts of religion and 
matchless in the world for his beauty, con¬ 
sidered him to be the fittest husband for (his 
daughter) Tapati. 

16. O descendant of Kuru, Surya then 
desired to bestow his daughter on that ex¬ 
cellent king Samvarana of the Kuru race! 
who was celebrated all over the world, 



ADI PARVA. 


241 


t?. As Surya in the heavens fills the 
firmament with his splendour, so did king 
Samvarana fill every region on the earth 
With the splendour of nis good achieve¬ 
ments. 

18. O Partha, as men learned in the 
Vedas worship the sun mannifests in all his 
glory, so did all men except the Brahmanas 
worship Samvarana. 

19. Blessed with good fortune, the king 
(Samvarana) excelled Soma (moon) in soo¬ 
thing the hearts of freinds and Surya 
(sun) in schorching the hearts of the 
enemies. 

20. O descendant of Kuru, Tapana him¬ 
self resolved upon bestowing Tapati on the 
king (Samvarana) endued with such virtue 
and accomplishments. 

21. O Partha, once upon a time that 
king, blessed with good fortune and endued 
with great prowess, went out to hunt in the 
woods on the mountains. 

22. When thus hunting, the horse of that 
king of the Kuru race was overcome with 
hunger and thirst, and he (horse)’died on the 
mountains. 

23. O Partha, abandoning the dead 
horse, the king walked on the mountain and 
saw a maiden of large eyes and matchless 
beauty. 

24. That chastiser of foes, that best of 
kings, himself being alone and the maiden 
being also alone, stood motionless, and 
he steadfastly gazed at her. 

25. The king regarded her for her 
beauty as the goddess Lakshmi. He 
regarded her beauty to be the embodiment 
of the rays emanating from the sun. 

26. In splendour of body, she resembled 
a flame of fire, and in benignity and loveli¬ 
ness she resembled the spotless disc of the 
moon. 

27. The black-eyed maiden, standing on 
the mountain breast, looked like a bright 
statue of gold. 

28. In consequence of the beauty and 
splendour of that maiden the mountain 
itself with its creepers and plants appeared 
as if it has been converted into gold. 

29. The sight of that maiden inspired the 
king with a contempt for all the women of 
the world that he had seen before. Seeing 
her, the king considered his eyes blessed. 

30. Nothing that the king has seen from 
the day of his birth could equal, he argued, 
the beauty of that girl. 

31. (He thought) “The creator has 
created the beauty of this beautiful-eyed 
maiden after churning the whole world of 


the Devas and the Asaras and the human 
beings." The king's heart and eyes were 
captivated by that maiden, as if they 
became bound in ropes; he remained 
rooted to the spot deprived of his senses. 

32. thus arguing, the king Samvarana 
considered that maiden as matchless in the 
wealth of her beauty in the three worlds. 

33. The king of the noble birth, seeing 
that blessed beauty, was pierced by the 
arrows of the god of love. 

34. Having been burnt in the veiy schor¬ 
ching fire of Kama (desire), he (the king) 
thus spoke to that charming maiden, still 
innocent though in her full youth. 

The Samvarana said 

35. O lady of tapering thighs,—who and 
whose are you ? Why are you staying here ? 
O lady of sweet smiles, why do you wander 
alone in these solitary woods T 

36. You are perfectly faultless in your 
every feature; decked in every ornament, 
you seem to be the coveted ornament of 
those ornaments themselves. 

37. You seem to be not a Devi or an 
Asuri, or a Yakshmi, or a Rakshashi; you 
are not a Nagini or a Gandharvi or a 
Manushi. 

38. O excellent lady, the best of women 
that I have seen or heard of can not equal 
you in beauty. 

39. O lady of beautiful feature, seeing 
your face which is loHier than the moon, 
and your eyes like the lotus leaves, 1 am 
oppressed by the god of love. 

The Gandharva said 

40. The king, oppressed by desire, thus 
addressed her in the solitary woods, but she 
did not speak a word in reply, 

41. When the king repeatedly asked her 
thus, the large-eyed maiden quickly dis¬ 
appeared in tne very sight of the king like 
a flash of lightning. 

42. The king then, likfe one who has los 
his reason, wandered through the whole 
forest in search of that lotus-eyed maiden. 

43. Having failed to find her, that best 
of kings gave vent to much lamentations, and 
he remained motionless in grief for some¬ 
time. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy third 
Section , the history •of Tapati, in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva. 


31 



mahabharata. 


Section CLXXIV. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— contd. 

He Gandharva said:— 

1. On the disappearance of the maiden, 
that chastiser of foes the king, being de¬ 
prived of h» senses by desire, fell on the 
ground. 

2. On his falling down on the ground, 
that maiden of sweet smiles and of swelling 
and round hips, appeared again before the 
king. 

The blessed beauty (Tapati) then spoke 
t# that king, the perpetuator of the Ruru 
race, these sweet words. 

4—5. Sweetly smiling, Tapati spoke thus 
in sweet words, “ Rise, rise, O chastiser of 
foes, be blessed. O best of kings, you are 
celebrated in the world, it does not befit 
you to lose vour senses.” Having been thus 
addressed by her in these sweet words, 

6. The king (opening his eyes) saw 
before him that maiden of swelling hips. 
The king then addressed that black-cyed 
maiden thus, 

7—9. In accents weak with emotion, and 
his heart burning with the fire of desire, M O 
black-eyed beauty, O excellent lady, be 
blessed. 1 am burning with desire; and l, 
therefore, solicit you. Accept me, my life is 
ebbing away. O !ad\ of large eyes, O lotus¬ 
eyed beauty, it is all for (not having obtained) 
you. The pod of love pierces me day and 
night with his arrows. O blessed lady, I have 
been bitten by Rama (the god of love) who 
is like a large snake. 

to. O lady of faultless features, O lady 
©f tapering thighs, O lady of sweet voice as 
that of the Kinnaris, have mercy on me ; 
my life depends on you. 

xi. O lady of beautiful and faultless 
features, O lady with the face like the lotus 
or the moon, O timid lady, I shall certainly 
be unable to live without you. 

12. O lotus-eyed lady, O lady of large 
eyes, the god of love is incessantly piercing 
me, be merciful towards me. 

13. O black-eyed lady, you should not 
abandon me. O handsome lady, you should 
relieve me from such affliction by giving 
me your love. 

14. O blessed beauty, at the very first 
sight, my heart has been captivated by you. 
My mind wanders. Seeing you, I do not 
like to cast my eyes on any other woman. 

V>. O beautiful maiden, be merciful,— 
I am your obedient (slave), (I am) your 
adorer; accept me. O beautiful lady, O 
large-eyed maiden, as soon as I saw you, 
he god of love. 


16. Entered my heart, and he is piercing 
me with his arrows. O large-eyed lady, 
O lotus-eyed beauty, the great fire of desire 
is burning within me. 

17—18. Extinguish that fire by throwing 
on it the water of your love. O beautiful 
lady, pacify, by becoming mine, the irrepres¬ 
sible god of love that has appeared here (in 
my heart) armed with bow and arrows; 
he pierces me incessantly with his sharp 
arrows. 

19. O beautiful-featured maiden, O lady 
of tapering hips, marry roe according to 
the Gandharva form, for of all kinds of 
marriage the Gandharva form has been said 
to be the best. 0 

Tapati said:— 

20. O king, I am not the mistress of my 
ownself. Rnow roe to be a maiden living 
under the control of itiy father. If you really 
love me, ask me of my father. 

21. O king, you say that your heart has 
been robbed by me; but you too have 
robbed my heart at the first sight. 

22. O best of kings, 1 am not the mis¬ 
tress of my body ; therefore I do not go near 
you. Women are never independent. 

23. Is there any girl in the three worlds 
who would not desire for her husband such 
a laihg as you,—kind to all your dependents 
and born of a noble race. 

24. therefore, when the opportunity 
comes, ask me of my father Aditya with 
due salutation, ascetic penances and vows. 

25. O king, O chastiser of foes, if my 
father bestows me on you when asked, I 
shall ever be your obedient (wife). 

26. My name is Tapati, I am the younger 
sister of Savitri. O best of Rshatryas, I am 
the daughter of Surya, the illuminator of the 
Universe. 

thus ends the hundred and the seventy- 
fourth Section , the history of Tapati , in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXXV. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA).— Contd. 

The Gandharva said:— 

1. Having said this, that faultless 
(maiden) soon ascended the skies ; on this 
the king again fell down on the ground. 

2. In searching that best of kings, that 
monarch's ministers and attendants saw bint 
there in that state in the great forest. 



ADI PArVA. 


3 ^ 4 ' Seeing that excellent king, that 
great bowman, lying forsaken on the ground 
like a rain-bow dropped from the sky, 
his chief minister became like one burnt by 
a flame of fire. Coming hastily to him with 
affection and respect, 

5. As a father raises up the son fallen 
(on the ground) he raised up the king, lying 
senseless on the ground having been de¬ 
prived of his senses by desire. 

6. Old In wisdom as in age, and in 
achievements as in policy, the minister be¬ 
came easy of mind when he raised him up. 

7. He spoke to him these words, both 
sweet and beneficial, ««O best of men, do 
not fear. O sinless one, be blessed.” 

8 . The minister thought the king, that 
destroyer of hostile forces, had been lying 
on the ground being overcome with hunger, 
thirst and fatigue. 

9. He sprinkled on the crownless head 
of the king cold water fragrant with the 
perfume of lotus. 

10. Thereupon, the mighty king regain¬ 
ed his consciousness ; he then sent away all 
his attendants except that one minister. 

if. When that large number of atten¬ 
dants had gone away at the command of 
the king, the king again sat down on the 
mountain breast. 

12. Then the king becoming pure and 
folding his hands, worshipped Surya with 
his face turned upwards on that best of 
mountains. 

13. That chastiser of foes, the king 
Samvarana, also mentally thought of his 
priest, that excellent Rishi, Vashistha. 

 4  /The king remained there for days 
and nights without intermission; and on 
the twelvth day the Brahmana Rishi 
(Vashistha) came to him. 

15. That great self-controlled Rishi 

knew by his ascetic power that the king’s . 
heart was stolen by Tapati. j 

16. As soon as that virtuous-minded and 

the best of Rishis knew this, he became < 
desirous of benefitting the king and gave c 
him his assurances. ^ 

■ , 7 «. In the very sight of the king, the 
illustrious Rishi ascended thesky in order to ^ 
see Surya,—he himself being as effulgent as c 
that luminary. 

18. Thereupon, the Brahmana (Vashistha) f 
came with joined hands to the deity of one / 
thousand rays, and he then introduced 
himself by saying, " 1 am Vashistha.” 


; "O great Rishi, welcome to you. Tell me 
1 what is your desire. 

20. O greatly fortunate man, O foremost' 
Ot all eloquent men, whatever you desire 
to have, l shall give you however difficult it 
may be to give.” 

21. Having been A us addressed after 
duly bowing down his head to him the 
Kishi Vashistha of great ascetic merit, thus 
replied to Vivaswata. 

Vashistha said:— 

22. O Vivaswata, 1 ask of you for 
banwarana your daughter, named Tapati. 
the younger sister of Savitri. 

23. He (Samvarana) is a mighty king 
with great achievements: he is learned in the 
mysteries of religion, and he is high-minded. 

O ranger of sky, Samvarana is the fittest 
husband for your daughter. 

The Gandharva said 

24. Having been thus addressed. Viva, 
kara (Surya) resolved upon bestowing (his 
daughter on Samvarana), and saluting the 
Rishi thus replied, 

25. “O Rishi, Samvarana’ is the best of 
kings? you are (also) the best of all Rishis ; 
Tapati is (surely) the best of all women ; what 
else could be done but to bestow her (on 
Samvarana)! 

26. ^ Then Tapana himself gave to the  
j illustrious Vashistha (his daughter) Tapati 
^>fl perfectly faultless features, so that she 
might be bestowed on Samvarana. 

27 The great Rishi Vashistha accep¬ 
ted that maiden Tapati, and taking leave of 
Surya he came back to the place, 

23 . Where that best of the Kurus, the 
king of celebrated acheivements, was. That 
king who had been possessed of desire and 
whose heart was completely fixed on her 
(Tapati) 

29. Became exceedingly glad on seeing 
that celestial maiden Tapati of sweet smiles 
led towards him by Vashistha. 

30. That maiden of fair eye-brows came 
down from the sky as lightning comes 
down from the clouds illuminating the ten 
points of heaven, 

31. The illustrious Rishi of pure soul 
Vashistha came to that king when his vow 
of the twelvth night was over. 

32. thus Samvarana obtained (Tapati) 
as his wife by worshipping propitious 
lord (Surya) by ascetic penances and by the 


19. Then the greatly effulgent Vivas¬ 
wata thus spoke to that excellent Brahmana, 


« • V . / J ~ : r ...«..vvu anu UJT CIIO 

help of the great effulgence of Vashistha. 

33. That best of kings accepted the hands 
of Tapati in due form on the breast of that 
mountain frequented by the celestials and 
the Gandharvasi 



944 


MftHABHARATA. 


34. The royal sage (Samvarana) with 
the permission of Vashistha desired to sport 
with his wife on that mountain. 

35. He ordered the minister to rule 
over his capital, his kingdom, his woods 
and forests. 

36. Then bidding farewell to the king, 
Vashistha left him and went away. There¬ 
upon, the king ^ported on that mountain 
like a celestial. 

37. The king sported with his wife in the 
woods and forests on that mountain for 
twelve (long) years. 

38. O descendant of Bharata, for those 
twelve years the god of one thousand eyes 
(Indra) did not pour any rains on the 
capital and the kingdom of that king. 

39. O chastiser of foes, when that season 
of draught commenced, all the people, to? 
gether with plants, corns and animals began 
to die. 

40. During that terrible season (of draught,) 
not ev6n a drop of dew fell on the earth, and 
(consequently) no corn was grown. 

41. Thereupon the people, afflicted with 
the fear of hunger, left their houses in des¬ 
pair and fled in all directions. 

42. The famished people of the city 
and the country abandoned thsir wives and 
children and grew reckless of one another. 

43. The people, being afflicted with 
hunger and starvation, became like dead 
skeletons; and the city looked like the 
land of the king of the dead full of ghostly 
beings. 

44. Thereupon, seeing the kingdom in 
such a state, the illustrious Rishi, the best of 
ascetics, the virtuous-minded Vashistha, 
thought of remedying the evil. 

45. O king, he brought back that best 
of kings (Samvarana) with his wife (Tapati) 
to that city, after he had passed many years 
with her. 

46—47. When that best of kings again 
entered his capital, the state of things be¬ 
came as before, the god of one thousand 
eyes, the slayer of Asuras, poured rain in 
abundance; and he caused corn to grow. 
thus being revived by that virtuous-minded 
and that best of kings (Samvarana), the 
cnnital and the country became exceedingly 
glad. 

48. Thereupon the king with his wife 
Tapati performed sacrifices for twelve years, 
as Indra did with (his wife) Shachi. 

49. O Partha, this is the history of the 
reatly blessed Tapati of old, the daughter 

°f Vivaswata, It is for her you arc Tapatya . 


50. O Arjuna, the king Samvarana begat 
on Tapati a son, named Kuru. Born in the 
race of Tapati, you are called Tapatya . 

thus ends the hundred and seventy fifth 
Section , the history ef Tapati, in the Chat - 
traratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXXVI, 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Hearing these words of the Gandharva, 
that best of the Bharata race, Arjuna, was 
filled with devotion (towards him), and he 
stood as manifest as the full moon. 

2. His curiosity being excited by what 
he heard of Vashistba’s ascetic power, that 
best of the Kurus, that great bowman, 
thus spoke to the Gandharva, 

3. 11 1 desire to hear the history of the 
Rishi whom you have mentioned by the 
name of Vashistha. Tell me all about him 
in detail. 

4. O chief of the Gandharvas, tell me 
who this illustrious Rishi was,—he who was 
the priest of our forefathers. 1  

The Gandharva said 

5—6. Vashistha was the Brahma’s son 
born of his mind ; and he was the husband of 
Arundhati. Ever difficult of being conquered 
even by the celestials, Desire and Anger, 
having been conquered by his ascetic 
penances, shampooned his feet. He was So 
high-souled that he did not exterminate the 
Kaushikas • 

7. though the excellent Rishi’s anger was 
excited by Vishwamitra, though he was 
afflicted at the loss of his sons, though he was 
powerful, yet he appeared to be powerless. 

8—9. He did not perform any dreadful 
deed for destroying Vishwamitra. Like the 
reat ocean which does not cross its shore, 
c did not transgress the law of Yama by 
bringing back his sons from the land of the 
dead. It is by obtaining this self-controlled 
and illustrious (Rishi), the kings, 

10. (Namely) Ikshaku and others, became 
the lords over the whole earth. Getting ti e 
excellent Rishi Vashistha as their priest, 

11. O descendant of Kuru, O best of the 
Panelnvas, these kings performed many great 
sacrifices. That Brahmarshi performed 
the priestly duty of all these excellent kings, 
as Vrihashpati did that of the celestials. 

12. therefore, seek to appoint as your 
riest an accomplished Brahmana in whose 
eart virtue predominates and who is learned 

in the Vedas. 



ADI PARVA. 


45 


13. O Partha, a Kshatriya of noble birth 
should first appoint a priest, if he is(at all) 
desirous of. extending his dominions by con¬ 
quering the earth. He, who is desirous of 
conquering the earth, should have a 
Brahmana before him. 

14. therefore let an accomplished and 
learned Brahmana, who has conquered his 
senses and who is learned in Dharma, Artha 
and Kama, be your priest. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy sixth 
Section , whom to appoint a priest , in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXXVII. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)

Arjuna said 

1. How arose the hostility between 
Vishwamitra and Vashistha, both of whom 
lived in celestial hermitages ? Tell us all this 
in detail. 

The Gandharva said 

2. O Partha, this history of Vashistha is 
considered as a Purana in all the worlds. 
Listen to me as I recite it in detail. 

3. O best of the Bharata race, there was 
a great king in Kannyakubja; known in the 
world by the name of Gadhi,— he was the 
son of Kushika. 

4. His son was known by the name of 
Vishwamitra. That chastiser of foes, Vishwa- 
mitra, was virtuous-minded ; and he had a 
large army of troops and beasts of burdens. 

5. He wandered with his ministers in the 
deep forest for the purpose of hunting. 
Killing deer and boars, he roamed through 
the charming marshes. 

6. Being(one day) fatigued and thirsty 
by the exercise of the hunt that best of men, 
came to the hermitage of Vashistha. 

7. Seeing him coming, the illustrious and 
blessed Rishi, Vashistha, advanced to salute 
that best of men, Vishwamitra. 

8. O descendant of Bharata, he (Vash¬ 
istha) worshipped him (Vishwamitra) by 
asking his welfare, by offering Arghya and 
water to wash his face and feet, and by 
collected forest fruits and Ghee . 

9. The illustrious Rishi had a Kamadhenu , 
(a cow yielding every thing as desired.) 
When she was addressed by saying “ Give” 
she always gave what was desired. 

10—12. O Arjuna, the Rishi received 
from her various wild fruits, and grown corn 
of gardens and fields, milk, many excel¬ 


lent nutritious viands filled with six different 
kinds of juice which was like ambrosia itself, 
various other kinds of enjoyable things of 
ambrosial taste, things for drinking and 
eating, for lapping and sucking, and many 
precious gems and various costly robes. Witn 
these desirable objects in profusion, the king 
(Vishwamitra) was worshipped. And he with 
his ministers and troops was became exceed 
ingly glad. 

13—14. He (Vishwamitra) became very 
much astonished to see that cow which had 
six elevated limbs, beautiful flanks and hips, 
fine broad limbs, frog-like prominent eyes, 
beautiful size, high udders, faultless make, 
straight and up-lifted ears, handsome horns 
and well-developed head and neck. 

15. O prince, that king, the son of Gadhi, 
was exceedingly gratified with all that he 
saw, and very much praising (the cow) 
Nandini he thus spoke to the Rishi 
(Vashistha), 

16. “O Brahmana, O great Rishi, give 
me (your) Nandini (cow) in exchange often 
thousand kine, or of my kingdom. (Give her 
to me) and enjoy my kingdom. 

Vashistha said 

17. O sinless one, this milk-giving cow is 
kept by me for the purposes of the celestials, 
the Pitris and the guests,and for my sacrifices. 
Nandini cannot he given (to you) in exchange 
of even your kingdom. 

Vishwamitra said 

18. I am a Kshatriya, and your respected 
self is a Brahmana devoted to study and 
asceticism. Is there prowess in Brah- 
manas who are peaceful and have their souls 
under control ? 

19. When you do not give me what I 
desire to have in exchange of ten thousand 
kine, I shall not abandon the duty of my 
race (that of the Kshatriya). I will take 
your cow by force. 

Vashistha said 

20. You are a powerful king, you are a 
Kshatriya possessing great strength of 
arms ; do what you desire without delay and 
without stopping to consider over it. 

The Gandharva said:— 

21. O Partha, having been thus addres¬ 
sed, Vishwamitra then siezed the cow Nan¬ 
dini as white as the swan or the moon. 

22. He dragged her hither and thither 
and afflicted her by striking her with a stick.' 
The blessed Nandini cried piteously and 
came near Vashistha, 



MAHABliARATA. 


4& 


23. O Partha, she stood near hbp with 
Up-lilted face staring at the illustrious Rishi. 
though very much ill-treated, she did not 
quit the Rishi’s hermitage. 

Vashistha said:— 

24. O amiable Nandini, you are crying 
again and again, and I hear your cries. But 
Vishwamitra is taking you away by force ; 
what can I do ? I am a forgiving Brahmana. 

The Gandharva said 

25. O best of the Bharata race, being 
alarmed at the sight of Vishwamitra’s troops 
and being terrified by Vishwamitra himself, 
Nandini came closer to Vashistha. 

Nandini said 

26. O illustrious Sir, lam afflicted by the 
stripes of the fearful troops of Vishwamitra. 
I am crying piteously like one who has none; 
why are you so indifferent to me ? 

The Gandharva said 

27. The great Rishi did not lose his 
patience, nor did he depart from his vow 
of forgiveness on hearing the words of the 
crying and persecuted Nandini. 

Vashistha said:— 

28. The might of the Kshatriyas lies in 
their physical strength,—that of the Brah- 
manas lies in their forgiveness. 1 cannot 
give up forgiveness. If you like, you can go. 

Nandini said:— 

29. O illustrious Sir, have you abandoned 
me that you say so ? O Brahmana, if you 
do not abandon me, I cannot be taken away 
by force. 

Vashistha said:— 

30. O blessed one, I do not abandon 
you. Stay if you can. Your calf, tied with 
a strong rope, is (even now) being carried 
away by force. 

The Gandharva said:— 

31. Having heard the word 'Stay, that 
Cow of Vashistha (Nandini) raised up her 
head and neck and became fearful to look 
at. 

32. With eyes red in anger and with 
repeated roars, she then attacked Vishwa- 
mitra’s troops on all sides. 

33. Afflicted with their stripes and being 
dragged . hither and thither, her anger 
(doubly) increased, and her eyes became 
red in wrath. 

34. Biasing in anger, she soon became 
fearful te look at as the sun at mid-day. 


She began incessantly to shower burning 
coals from her tail. 

35. A few moments after she brought 
forth from her tail an army of Palhavas , 
from her udders an army of Dravidas and 
Sakas, from her womb an army of 
Yavanas, from her dung an army of 
Savaras. 

36—87. From her urine an army of 
Kartchis and from her sides an army of 
Saravanas; and from the froth of her mouth 
that cow created hosts of Kiratas, Yavanas, 
Singhalas, Barbaras , Chivakas, Pulindas , 
Chinas, Hunas and Keralas afrid many other 
Mlechas . 

38-7-39- Those large armies of Mlechas , 
clad in various uniforms and armed with 
various weapons,—as soon as they sprang 
into life,—spreading all around attacked 
before his very sight the troops of 
Vishwamitra,—five or seven attacking one. 

40. Assailed with a great shower of 
weapons, Vishwamitra's troops before his 
very sight broke and fled panick-stricken 
in all directions. 

41. O best of the Bharata race, though 
greatly excited with anger, the troops of 
Vashistha did not take tne life of any of 
Vishwamitra’s troops. 

42. That cow (Nandini) simply drove 
the troops (of Vishwamitra )to a distance. 
Being thus driven full seventy-seven miles, 
the troops of Vishwamitra, 

43. Becoming panick-stricken, cried 
aloud and did see none who could protect 
them. Seeing this great and wonderful feat of 
the Brahma might, 

44. Vishwamitra became disgusted with 
the Kshatriya might and spoke thus,—“Fie 
on the Kshatriya prowess ? The Brahma 
might is the true might. 

45. In judging of strength and weakness, 
I see asceticism is true strength.” Thereupon 
that best of kings abandoning his kingdom 
and regal splendour, 

46. And turning his back on all plea¬ 
sures, set his mind on asceticism. (At last) 
crowned with ascetic success, he filled the 
world with his effulgence. 

47. Afflicted all with his effulgence, he 
became a Brahmana. The son of Kushika, 
(Vishwamitra) at last drank the Soma (am¬ 
brosia) with Indra himself. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy 
seventh chapter, the defeat of Vishwamitra , 
by Vashistha , in the Chaitraratha of the 
Adi Parva. 



ADI PARVA. 


•47 


Section CLXXVIII- 

(CHA 1 TRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

The Gandharva said 

1. O Partha,Jthere was a king named 
Kalmashapada in this world. He nelonged 
to the race of Ikshaku, and he was match¬ 
less in prowess. 

2. One day the king came out of his 
capital for the purpose of hunting. That 
chastiser of foes pierced (with his arrows) 
many deer and boars. 

3. He also killed in that greatly fearful 
forest many rhinoceroses. thus killing 
(animals) for a lone period, the king became 
tired and refrained from it. 

4—6. (One day) when the king, whom the 
greatly powerful Vishwamitra desired to 
make his spiritual disciple, was proceeding 
through the forest afflicted with hunger and 
thirst he met with that best of Rishis, the 
high-souled son of Vashistha, the illustrious 
perpetuator of Vashistha’s race, the eldest 
of the one hundred sons of the illustrious 
Rishi Vashistha, known by the name of 
Saktri, coming along the same path from an 
opposite direction. 

7. The king said, “Stand out of our way.” 
Thereupon the Rishi spoke thus in a conci¬ 
liatory manner and in sweet words, 

8. “O great king, this is my way. This 
is eternal religion. The king should yield 
the way to the Brahmanas according to all 
the precepts of religion. ” 

9. thus they addressed each other res¬ 
pecting their right of way. “Stand aside,” 
•‘Stand aside,” were the words they said to 
each other. 

10. The Rishi, being in the right, did not 
yield ; the king also did not yield out of 
anger and pride. 

11. Being enraged on seeing the Rishi 
decline to yield the way to him, that best 
of kings, acted like a Rakshasha, and he 
struck nim violently with his whips. 

12. That best of Rishis, the son of 
Vashistha, being thus struck by the whip, 
was deprived of his (good) senses, and out 
of anger, cursed that best of kings. 

The l&ishi said:— 

13. O worst of kings, as you injure an 
gscetic like a Rakshasha, you shall from this 
day be a cannibal. 

u. O worst of kings, go hence. You 
shall gander over (he world eating human 
flesh, 


The Gandharva said 

thus said (the Rishi) Saktri, pdbsessing 
great (ascetic) prowess. 

15. At this time Vishwamitra, with whom 
Vashistha had a great quarrel on the matter 
of becoming the priest (of the king Kalmasha 
pada), came to the place (where Vashistha’s 
son and the king were.) 

16. O Partha, the Rishi of severe ascetic 
penances, the powerful Vishwamitra, came 
there where they were both quarrel ling. 

17. Thereupon after the curse on the 
excellent king (had been uttered) he came 
to know that the Rishi was the son of 
Vashistha as powerful as Vashistha himself. 

18. O descendant of Bharata, being 
desirous of benefitting himself, Vishwamitra 
remained there concealed from the sight 
of both by making himself invisible. 

19. Then that best of kings, (Kal~ 
mashapada), having been thus cursed by 
Saktri, asked the protection of Saktri 
by humbly beseeching him. 

20. O best of the Kuru race, knowing 
the disposition of the king, Vishwamitra 
ordered a Rakshasha to enter the king’s 
body. 

21. Obedient to Saktri’s curse and 
Vishwamitra’s order, a Rakshasha, named 
Kinkara, then entered the king’s body. 

22. O chastiser of foes, knowing that 
the Rakshasha had entered the bedy of 
the king, that best of Rishis, Vishwamitra, 
left the place and went away. 

23. O Partha, then the king, being thus 
possessed by the Rakshasha and terribly 
afflicted by him, lost all his senses. 

24. A certain Brahmana saw the king 
roaming in the forest. Being hungry, he 
begged of the king some food with meat. 

25. The royal sage (Kalmashapada) 
with his friends said to the Brahmana, 
“ O Brahmana, Stay here for a moment, 

26. On my return I shall give you what¬ 
ever food you desire to have.” Having said 
this, the king went away, but that excel¬ 
lent Brahmana remained there. 

27. O Partha, that high-minded king, 
after roaming at pleasure and at will (for 
sometime), returned (to his palace) and 
entered the inner-apartment. 

28. Waking at midnight and remem¬ 
bering his promise to the Brahmana, the 
king soon summoned his cook and spoke to 
him thus. 

The Xing said 

29. Go at once to the forest where a 
Brahmana is waiting for me in the hope of 



MAHABHARATa. 


+ 

getting food. Go and entertain him with 
food and meat. 

The Gandharva said 

30. Having been thus addressed, the 
cook (went away in search of meat), but 
having failed to procure any meat, he 
sorrowfully informed the king (of his 
failure). 

31; The king, possessed as he was by 
the Rakshasha, again and again said to the 
cook without any scruple, “ Feed him with 
human flesh.” 

32. Saying “Be it so,” the cook went 
to the place where the executioners were 
and he soon took from them human flesh. 

33. He washed it and then properly 
cooked it, and then covering it with boiled 
rice, he gave it to the hungry ascetic 
BrahmAna. 

34. That excellent Brahmana, seeing 
by his ascetic eye that the food was un¬ 
worthy of being eaten, thus spoke with his 
eyes red in anger. 

The Brahmana said 

35. Because that worst of kings offers 
me unworthy food, therefore that fool himself 
will be fond of such food. 

36. Becoming fond of human flesh as 
cursed by Saktri before, he shall wander 
over the earth, persecuting all creatures. 

The Gandharva said 

37. The curse on the king, thus repeated 
for the second time, became very strong. 
And the king being possessed of the Rak¬ 
shasha disposition, soon lost all his senses. 

38. Thereupon, O descendant of Bharata, 
that best of kings, having been deprived of 
all his senses by the Rakshasha within him, 
and having seen before him Saktri who 
had cursed him, said, 

■ 39. “ Because you have inflicted upon me 

this extraordinary curse, therefore, I shall 
commence my life of cannibalism by eating 
you. 

40. Having said this, the king immedi¬ 
ately killed Saktri and ate him up as a 
tiger eats up the animal it is fond of. 

41. Having seen Saktri thus killed, 
Vishwamitra again urged that Rakshasha 
(within the king) to kill the other sons of 
Vashistha. 

42. He (the Rakshasha) devoured in 
anger all the sons of the illustrious 
Vashistha,—the younger brothers of Saktri,- 
as a lion devours small animals. 


43. Having learnt that his song had 
been caused to be killed by Vishwamitra, 
Vashistha patiently bore his grief, as the 
great mountain bears the earth. 

44. That best of Rishis, that foremost of 
all intelligent men (Vashistha), resolved 
rather to sacrifice his own life than to exter¬ 
minate the race of the Kushikas. 

45. The illustrious Rishi threw himself 
down from the summit of the Meru mountain, 
but he descended on the stony ground as if 
it was a heap of cotton. 

46. O son of Pandu, when the illustrious 
(Rishi) found that he was not killed by 
that fall, he made a huge fire in that great 
forest and entered it. 

47. The fire, though blaring fearfully, 
did not consume him. O chastiser of foes, 
that blazing fire seemed to him cool. 

48. Then seeing the sea (before him), the 
great Rishi, afflicted with grief, tied a heavy 
stone to his neck and threw himsdf into its 
waters. 

49. The great Rishi was with great force 
brought by the waves to the shore. He 
then returned to his hermitage with a sorrow¬ 
ful heart. 

thus ends the hundred and seventy 
eighth Section , the grief of Vashistha , in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXXIX. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Cantd 

The Gandharva said 

1. Seeing his hermitage bereft of his 
children, the Rishi, afflicted with grief, again 
came out of it. 

2. O Partha, (in course of his wandering), 
he saw a river swollen with the waters of the 
rainy season, it was sweeping away many 
trees and plants that grew on its banks. 

3. O descendant of Kuru, seeing this, 
the sorrowful Rishi began to ponder and 
thought that he would certainly be killed if 
he fell into its waters. 

4. Thereupon the great Rishi tied him¬ 
self with very strong cords and fell in 
grief into the waters ofthat great river. 

5. O chastiser of hostile ranks, the 
river, having tom those cords and making 
him free of them, cast him on the land. 

6. Having been freed from the cords, 
the great Rishi rose (from the shore) and 
he gave that river the name of Bipasha . 



ADI PARVA. 


% fteelng oppressed with grief, that 
kishi could not from that time stay at one 
place. He went to the rrtountains, rivers, 
and lakes. 

8. Seeing once more the river Himavati 
bf terrible appearance and full of fierce 
animals, the Rishi threw himself into its 
waters. 

9. That best of rivers, thinking the Brah- 
tnana to be fire, immediately fled away In a 
hundred different streams, and thence was 
she called the Sadadtu. 

10. Thereupon, seeing himself again in 
dry land (he sai 1), 14 (Alas) ! I am not able 
to die by my own hands." Saying this, (the 
Rishi) again went to (his own) hermitage. 

11. When he Was thus returning-, cros¬ 
sing various mountains and countries, his 
daughter-in-law Adhrisanti was following 
him. 

12. He heard from behind, as she neared 
him, the sound of the well‘explained recita¬ 
tions of the Vedas with its six ornaments 
(of elocution \ 

13. He said, 14 Who is it that follows 
me V His daughter-in-law replied, “ I 
am Adhrisanti^ the wife of Saktri. 1 am an 
ascetic woman, engaged in asceticism." 

Vashistha aaid 

l 4 - O daughter, whose is this sound of the 
recitations of the Vedas with their Angas, 
that is,heard by me and (which is exactly) like 
the recitations of the Vedas and the Angas 
by Saktri ? 

Adhrisanti said 

15. In my womb is a child begotten by 
your son Saktri. He has been here (study¬ 
ing the Vedas) for twelve years. You have 
heard the recitations (of the Vedas) by that 
Rishi. 

The Oandharva said 

16. Having been thus addressed by her 
that best of Rishis, Vashistha, became ex¬ 
ceedingly glad. O Partha, saying, “There 
is a child (if my race)", he refrained from 
self-destruction. 

17. The sinless (Rishi), accompanied by 
his daughter-in-law, returned fto nis hermit¬ 
age). He saw (one day) kalmashapada 
sitting in a solitary forest. 

18. O descendant of Bharata, on seeing 
him the king at once rose in anger and as 
he was possessed with the Rakshasha, he 
desired to devour the Rishi. 

19. Seeing that king of cruel deeds, 
Adhrisanti spoke thus to Vashistha in an¬ 
xiety and fear, 


249 

20. “ O illustrious Sir, the fearful Raksha¬ 
sha (looking) like Death himself antied with 
his staff is coming towards us with a wooden 
club in his hand. 

21. O illustrious Sir, O best of all learned 
men in the Vedas, there is none else except 
you in the world who CAn restrain him 
to-day. 

22. O illustrious Sir, save me from this 
cruel wretch of fearful appearance. Th e 
Rakshasha is cetainly coming towards us to 
devour Us. 

Vashistha said 

3. O daughter, do not fear i there is 
nothing to be afraid of from any Rakshasha. 
There is no fear from this Rakshasha whom 
you see coming. • 

24. He is the king Kalmashapada, cele¬ 
brated in the world as being a very power¬ 
ful (monarch). That fearful man lives in 
this forest. 

The Gandharva said:— 

25. O descendant of Bharata, the illus¬ 
trious and the effulgent Rishi Vashistha 4 
seeing him advancing, stopped him by 
uttering a loud roar. 

26. Sprinkling over him water sanctified 
by Mantras (incantations)) he freed the 
mng from the terrible curse 

27. He (the king) had been overwhelmed 
by the effulgence of Vashistha’s son, as thi 
sun by the planet (Rahu) at the time ot an 
eclipse 

28. Having been thus freed from the 
Rakshasha by that Brahmana (Vashistha) 
the king illuminated the great forest by his 
splendour, as the sun illuminates the evening 
clouds. 

29. Regaining his consciousness^ the 
king saluted the Rishi With joined hands, 
and he thus spoke to that best of Rishis 
Vashistha 

30. " O illustrious Sir, t anl the son of 
Sudasa ; O excellent Rishi, I am your dis¬ 
ciple Tell me what is your desire now, 
and what I am to do« M 

Vashistha said:— 

31. O king of itfen, nly desire has beCrt 
fulfilled at the proper time. Return to youC 
kingdom and rule your subjects. Nevei 1 
(again) disregard the Brahmanas 

The Xing Said s— 

3a. O illustrious Sir, I shall never agairi 
disregard the best Brahmanas. In obe¬ 
dience to your command, I shall properly 
worship the Brahmanas; 


32 



5° 


MAHABHARATA. 


33. O best of the twice-born, O be9t of 
all men learned in the Vedas, I desire to 
obtain from you that by which I may be 
freed from the debt I owe to the race of 
Ikshaku. 

34. O excellent man, you should grant 
me a son, 1 desire to have, who will possess 
beauty, accomplishments and good beha¬ 
viour. 

The Gandharva said 

35. The best of the twice born, ever 
devoted to truth, Vashistha, replied to that 
great bowman, the king saying, “I will 
give.” 

36. O king of men, after sometime, 
Vashistha, accompanied J>y him (the king), 
went to his capital, known all over the | 
world by the name of Ayodhya. 

37. The people came out in joy to 
receive the sinless and the illustrious one, as 
the celestials do their chief (Indra). 

38. The king accompanied by the great 
Rishi Vashistha entered without delay his 
auspicious capital. 

39. The citizens of Ayodhya saw the 
king accompanied by his priest (Vashistha), 
as if he were the rising sun. 

40. The king, most handsome of all 
handsome men, filled Ayodhya with his 
splendour, as the autumnal moon fills the 
whole sky with his splendour. 

41. His (king’s) mind was filled with 
joy on seeing that excellent city with 
its well-watered and well-swept streets, 
and with banners and pendants flying 
all around. 

4 2. O descendant of Kuru, that city, 
full of well-fed and happy men, looked 
as gay as Amaravati with the presence of 
Indra. 

43. After the royal sage (the kin£ 
Kalmashapada) had entered that excellent 
city, the queen at his command, came to 
Vashistha. 

44. The best of Rishis, Vashistha, made 
an agreement with her, and he united him¬ 
self with her according to the highest 
ordinance. 

45. Thereupon, when the queen conceiv¬ 
ed by him, that best of Rishis (Vashistha), 
receiving the salutation of the king, went 
away to his hermitage. 

46. When she had borne the conccptio n 
for a long time, the illustrious lady tore 
open her womb with a piece of stone. 

47. thus was born after a conception of 
twelve years that best of men, that royal 


sage, Asmaka, who founded Pandavya 
(a city). 

thus ends the hundred and seventy 
ninth Section , the birth of the son if 
Saudashya in the Chaitraratha of the Ant 
Parva. 


Section CLXXX. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 
The Gandharva said 

1. O king, residing in the hermitage, 
Adhrisanti gave birth to a son who was the 
perpetuator of Saktri’s race and who was 
like a second Saktri. 

2. O best of the Bharata race, that best 
of Rishis, that illustrious man (Vashistha), 
himself performed the usual birth ceremoni¬ 
es of his grandson. 

3. Because the Rishi Vashistha had de¬ 
termined to kill himself, but had refrained 
from doing it as soon as he heard of the con¬ 
ception, the child (when born) was known 
in the world by the name of Parasara. 

4. That virtuous-minded man (Parasara) 
knew from the day of his birth Vashistha 
as his father and behaved towards him 
as such. 

5. O son of Kunti, O chastiser of foes, 
the child called the Brahmana Rishi Vashis¬ 
tha as ‘‘father” before his mother Adhri¬ 
santi. 

6. Heaing the well-explained word 
“father ” uttered sweetly by her son, Adhri¬ 
santi with tearful eyes thus spoke to >im, 

7. “O child, do not addess your father’s 
father as your father. O son, your father 
was devoured by a Rakshasha in another 
forest. 

8. O sinless one, he is not your father 
whom you consider to be (your father). The 
reverend man is the father of your illustrious 
father.” 

9. Having been thus addressed, that 
truthful and excellent Rishi became grieved, 
and that high-souled man resolved to 
destroy the whole creation. 

10. Seeing him resolved in doing this 
that high-souled and greatly ascetic Rishii 
that best of all men learned in the Vedas, 
that son of Mitravaruna, that Rishi acquain - 
ted with the positive truth, Vashistha, pre¬ 
vented him (from accomplishing his desire 
by arguments). Hear them (now). 

Vashistha said:— 

11. There was a great king, known by 
the name of Kritavirja. That best of kings 



ADI PARVA. 


was irt the world the disciple’ of the Veda- 
knowing Brigus. 

12. O child, after performing the Soma 
sacrifice, the king gratified the receivers of 
the first portions of Yagma (Brahmanas) 
with large presents of rice and wealth. 

13. When that best of kings went to 
heaven, his descendants were in want of 
wealth. 

14. Knowing’ that the Brigus were rich, 
those kings all went in the garb of beggars 
to those best of Brigus. 

15. Some of the Brigus to save their 
wealth buried it under the earth, and some 
from the fear of Kshatriyas gave away their 
wealth to the Brahmanas. 

16. O son, some of the Brigus, finding 
no other alternative, gave their wealth to 
the Kshatriyas as much as they desired. 

17. (It happened, however) that some 
Kshatriyas, in Jigging at pleasure a certain 
house of a Brigu, came upon a large 
treasure. 

18—19. All those best of Kshatriyas 
assembled there saw that treasure. Enraged 
at the supposed deceitful conduct of the 
Brigus, those great men killed them all with 
their arrows, though they asked for protec¬ 
tion. Roaming over the world, they killed 
even the embryos (that were in the wombs 
of the Brigu-women.) 

20. When they were thus killed, many 
Brigu women fled in fear and took shelter 
in the inaccessible mountains of the Hima¬ 
layas. 

21. One amongst them, a lady of tape- 
ring thighs, desiring to perpetuate her 
husbands’s race, kept a greatly energetic 
embryo hidden in one of ner thighs. 

22. A Brahmana woman came to know 
this fact, and she went to the Kshatriyas 
and out of fearireported it to them. 

23. Thereupon the Kshatriyas went 
with the intention of destroying that embryo 
and saw the Brahmana lady blazing in 
her own splendour. 

24. On this the child in her thigh came 
out tearing open the thigh, and dazling the 
eyes of the Kshatriyas like a mid-day sun. 

25. Thereupon they (the Kshatriyas), 
having been deprived of their sight, began 
to wander over those inaccessible hills. 
Being very much distressed for the loss of 
sight, the kings went to ask the protection 
of the faultless Brahmana lady in order to 
get back their sight. 

26. Afflicted with sorrow and looking 
like fire blown out on account^ of the loss of 


25 « 

sight, those Kshatriyas addressed that illus¬ 
trious lady with anxious heart. 

27. “When we shall be restored to sight 
by your grace, we shall go away together 
with our sinful acts. 

28. O handsome lady, you with your son 
should show mercy on us. You should favour 
these kings by granting them their sight.” 

thus ends the hundred and eightieth 
Section , the history of Aurva , in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CLXXXI. 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

The Brahmani said 

1. O children, I have not taken your 
eye-sight, nor am I angiy with you. This 
child of the Brigu race is certainly angry 
with you. 

2. O children, there is no doubt your 
eye-sight has been destroyed by this high- 
souled (Vargava) whose wrath has been 
kindled on remembering the massacre of his 
race. 

3. O children, when you were destroy¬ 
ing even the embryos of the Brigu race, 
this child was held by me in my thigh for 
one hundred years. 

4. So that he may do good to the Brigu 
race, the entire Vedas with their six Angas 
came to him when he was in the womb. 

5. Being enraged at the slaughter of his 
fathers ; he desires to kill you, it is by his 
celestial effulgence that your eye-sight has 
been destroyed. 

6. O children, therefore, pray to my 
this excellent son, born of my thigh. Pro¬ 
pitiated by your homage, and by your bow¬ 
ing down your head to him, he may restore 
your eye-sight. 

7. Having been thus addressed, all the 
kings addressed that thigh-born child, say¬ 
ing, “Be propitious” \ and the child became 
propitious to them. 

8. As he was born after tearing open 
his mother's thigh, that excellent Brahmana 
came to be known throughout the world by 
the name of Aurva. 

9. Regaining their eye-sight, the kings 
returned (to their homes), ana that descen¬ 
dant of V rigu resolved in his mind to over¬ 
come the world. 

Vashistha said •• 

,0_xi. O child, the high-souled man 

set his heart on the destruction of all crea¬ 
tures. In order to pay homage to hi s 
massacred ancestors, that descendant of the 



25 


MAHABUARATA. 


Brigu race engaged himself in the severest 
penances with the object of destroying the 
whole creation. 

12. He afflicted the worlds with the 
celestials, the Asuras and the men by his 
greatly severe penances ; and he thus grati¬ 
fied his ancestors. 

13. On learning what their son was 
doing in order to gratify their race, the 
Pitris alt came to him from their region and 
said. 

The Pitris said:— 

14. O Aurva, O son, fierce you have be? 
come by your asceticism. Your power has 
been seen by us. Be propitious to the 
worlds ; control your anger. 

15. O child, it was not from incapacity 
that the self-controlled Brigus were all in- 
defferent to their own destruction caused by 
the murderous Kshatriyas. 

16. O child, when we grew tired with our 
long life, then it was that we desired our own 
death at the hands of the Kshatriyas. 

17. The wealth that the Brigus have 
kept hidden under the earth had been placed 
there with the object of enraging the Ksha¬ 
tryas and creating a quarrel with them. 

18. O best of the twice born, of what use 
could wealth be to us who were desirous of 
obtaining heaven ? Our treasurer (in heaven) 
has kept large treasures for us. 

19. When we found that death could 
by no means overtake us all, then, O child, 
we considered this to be the best means (of 
destroying us.) 

20. O child, those that commit suicide 
never attain to the blessed regions. C >n- 
sidering this, we abstained from self-destruc¬ 
tion 

91. O child, that which you desire to do 
is not pleasing to us. therefore, control 
your mind and abstain from overcoming the 
whole world. 

22. O child, O son, do not destroy the 
Kshatiyas, nor the seven worlds. Destroy 
your this anger which stains your ascetic 
effulgence. 

thus ends the hundred and eighty-first 
chapter, stopping Aurva , in the Chaitra - 
ratna of the Adi Parva. 


Section CLXXX II- 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA )—contd. 

Aurva said 

1. O Pitris, the vow I uttered In anger 
for the destruction of all the worlds must not 
be in vain. 


2. I cannot consent to be one whue 
anger and vows are fruitless. This my 
anger will certainly consume me (if I do 
not accomplish my vow), as fire consumes 
the dry wood. 

3. The man, who suppresses his anger 
excited by a just cause, becomes incapable of 
duly compassing the Threebarga (Dharma. 
Artha and Kama.) 

4. The wrath, that the kings, desirous of 
subjugating the whole world, display, has its 
use. It serves to restrain the wicked and 
protect the honest. 

5. When I was lying unborn within my 
mother’s thigh, I heard the petious cries of 
my mother and other women of the Vrieu 
race as they were being massacred by the 
Kshatriyas. 

6. O Pitris. when those wretches, the 
Kshatriyas, were exterminating the Brigus 
together with the unborn children of their 
race, anger filled my soul. 

7. My mother and the other women of 
our race, each in a state of advanced preg¬ 
nancy,—and my father also,—though ex¬ 
ceedingly afflicted, did not get a protector in 
all the world. 

8. When the Brigu women did not find 
a single protector, my blessed mother held 
me (hidden )in one of her thighs. 

9. If there be a punisher of crimes in the 
world, no one in all the worlds could dare 
commit a crime. 

10. If sin does not find any punisher, then 
many men live in sinful acts. 

11. The man wh> having power to 
punish sin, does not do so, knowing that a 
sin has been committed, is himself defiled 
by that sin. 

12. The kings and others, who were 
capable of protecting my fathers, did not 
protect them, neglecting to perform their 
duty by giving themselves up to the pleas¬ 
ures of life. therefore, l have just cause to 
be enraged. I am the lord of creation,—I 
am incapable of obeying your command. 

14. Capable as I am of punishing this 
crime, if I abstain from doing it, men will 
once more have to undergo a similar per¬ 
secution. 

15. The fire of my wrath, which is ready 
to consume the worlds, if suppressed, will 
certainly consume me by its own energy- 

id. O masters, I know you always seek 
the good of the worlds. therefore, instruct 
me as to what may be good to myself or to 
the worlds. 



AD! PARVA. 


m 


ThePitriBBaid:- 

17. Throw this fire of your wrath which 
desires to consume the worlds into the 
waters. That will do you good. The worlds 
rest on water. 

18. Every juicy substance is full of water ; 
indeed the whole universe is full of water. 
therefore, O best of the twice born, throw 
this your anger into the waters. 

19. O Brahmana, if you desire it, let 
this fire of your wrath remain in the great 
ocean, cansuming its water, for we have 
heard the worlds are made of water. 

20. O sinless one, in this way your word 
will be made true, and the worlds with the 
celestials will not be destroyed. 

Vashistha said 

21. Thereupon Aurva threw the fire of 
his wrath into the abode of Varuna (sea) 
and that fire consumes the waters of the 
great ocean. 

22. Assuming a greatly fearful head 
(that of a horse) and emitting fire from its 
mouth, it consumes the waters of the great 
ocean. The men learned in the Vedas call 
it Vaddbamukha . 

23. O Parasara, O foremost of all wise 
men, you are acquainted with the higher 
regions,—you should not destroy the world. 

thus ends the hundred and eighty second 
chapter, the history of Aurva, in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva. 


Section C LX XX II I. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

The Gandharva said 

1. Having been thus addressed by the 
illustrious Vashistha, the Brahmana Rishi 
(Parasara) controlled his world-destroying 
wrath. 

2. But the greatly effulgent Parasara, 
the son of Saktn,—the foremost of all per¬ 
sons learhed in the Vedas,—performed a 
great Rakshasha-sacrifice. 

3. Remembering the slaughter of Saktri, 
the great Rbhi began to consume the Rak- 
shashas, young and old, in the sacrifice that 
be performed. 

4 Vashistha from his desire of not 
obstructing this second vow (of his grandson) 
did not prevent him from destroying the 
Rakshashas. 

5. The great Rishi (Parasara) sat in that 
sacrifice boo re three blazing fires, himself 1 
looking a fourth fire. 


6. Like the sun emerged from the clouds, 
the firmament was illuminated by that stain¬ 
less sacrifice in which large were the liba¬ 
tions of Ghee poured. 

7. Then Vashistha and the other Rishis 
regarded that Rishi, blazing with his own 
energy, as if he were a second sun. 

8. Then the great and the liberal-minded 
Rishi Atri came to that place with the desire 
of ending that sacrifice, a highly difficult act 
for any others. 

9. O chastiser of foes, there also came 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Mahakratu 
with the desire of saving the Rakshashas. 

10. O best of the Bharatarace, O Partha, 
seeing that many Rakshashas had been 
already killed, Pulustya spoke thus to that 
chastiser of foes, Parasara, 

11. “ O child, I hope there is no obstruc¬ 
tion to your this sacrifice. Do you take, 
pleasure, O child, in destroying the Raksha¬ 
shas who know nothing of your father’s 
death. 

12. You should not thus destroy all crea¬ 
tures. O son, it is not a (proper) act for the 
Brahmanas devoted to asceticism. 

13. O Parasara, peace is the highest 
virtue; therefore practise peace. O Parasara, 
being such a superior man, you (should not) 
consider sinful acts to be for your good. 

14. You should not transgress against 
Saktri who was learned in all the precepts of 
religion. You should not exterminate my 
creatures. 

15. O son of Vashistha, what befell your 
father all came upon him on account of his 
own curse. It was for his own fault that 
Saktri was taken to heaven. 

16. O Rishi, no Rakshasha was capable of 
devouring him ; he himself provided for his 
death. 

17. O Parasara, Vishwamitra was mere 
an instRuruent in that matter. The king Kal- 
mashapada, also ascending heaven, enjoy 
great happiness. 

18. Saktri and other sons of the great 
Rishi Vashistha are all even now in great 
happiness enjoying themselves with the ce¬ 
lestials. 

19—20. O great Rbhi, all this was known 
to Vashistha. O child, O grandson of Vashi¬ 
stha, you have been in this sacrifice only an 
instRuruent in the destruction of those inno¬ 
cent Rakshashas. Be blessed. Give up 
thb sacrifice. Let it come to an end. 

The Gandharva said 

21. Having been thus addressed by 
Pulastya and the intelligent Vashistha, the 



MAHABHAfeATA. 


S4 

g reat Rishi, the son of Saktri (Parasara), 
rought that sacrifice to an end. 

21. He (Parasara) threw away the fire that 
was kindled for the Rakshasha-sacrifice into 
the great forest on the north of the Hima¬ 
layas. 

23. There that fire may be seen to this 
day, always devouring in all seasons the 
Rakshashas, trees and stones, 

thus ends the hundred and eighty third 
Section , the history of Aurva , in the Chai - 
traratha of the Adi Parva . 


Section clxxxiv. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Arynna said:— 

1. Why did the king Kalmashapada 
command his queen to go to his preceptor, 
that foremost of all men learned in the 
Vedas ? 

2. Why did that great and illustrious 
Rishi Vashistha,—knowing as he knew all 
the great precepts of relegion,—went to a 
woman to whom he should not go ? 

3. O friend, was this an act of sin on 
the part of Vashistha ? I ask, you should 
remove my these doubts. 

The Gandharva said:— 

4. O Dhananjaya, O irrepressible hero, 
listen to me as 1 answer the question you 
have asked me in respect of Vashistha and 
that chastiser of foes the king (K ilmasha- 
pada). 

5. O best of the Bharata race, I have 
told you how the king Kalmashapada was 
cursed by Saktri, tne illustrious son of 
Vashistha. 

6. thus comming under the influence of 
that curse, that chastiser of foes, the king 
with his eyes whirling in anger came out of 
the city with his wife. 

7—8. Going to a solitary forest, he roam¬ 
ed with his wife. He roamed under the in¬ 
fluence of the curse in the terribly resounding 
forest, abounding in b various beasts and other 
animals, overgrown with numerous plants 
and creepers, and full of many large trees. 

9. One day becoming very much op¬ 
pressed with exceeding hunger, he searched 
for some food He saw in a certain solitary 
wood 

10. A Brahmana and a Brahmani engaged 
in sexual intercourse. Seeing him, they fled 
away in fear, their desire being unfulfilled. 


11. Pursuing them the king~setzed the 
Brahmana by force. Seeing her husband 
thus seized, the Brahmani said, 

12. H O king of excellent vows, listen to 
what 1 say ; it is known all over the world 
that you are born in the solar dynasty. 

13. You are always steadily engaged in 
performing virtuous acts,—you are ever en¬ 
gaged in serving your superiors; O irresis¬ 
tible hero, though you are deprived of 
your senses by the curse, you should not 
commit sin. 

14. On my season's coming, I was united 
with my husband in order to get offspring; 
but I have not been successful. 

15—16. O best of kings, be propitious to 
me, liberate my husband.” While she was 
thus crying, the king like a cruel wretch 
devoured her husband as a lion devours a 
deer. The tears that fell from her eyes on the 
ground on account of her anger 

17. Blayed up like a fire and consumed 
every thing in that place. Then afflicted 
with the death of her husband, 

18—20. The Brahmani cursed the royal 
sage Kalmashapada in anger. m O wretch, 
because you have to-day cruelly devoured in 
my very sight my illustrious and beloved 
husband when I was not gratified, therefore 
you shall by my curse meet with an instant 
death when you will unite yourself with your 
wife in season. That Rishi Vashistha, whose 
son you have devoured, 

21. Will unite himself with your wife to 
beget a son. O worst of kings, that son will 
be the perpetuator of your race.” 

22. Having thus cursed him, that blessed 
lady of the Angirasha race entered the blaz¬ 
ing fire in his very presence. 

23. O chastiser of foes, the illustrious 
Vashistha immediately knew all this by his 
great asceticism and spiritual sight. 

24. After a long time the royal sage 
(Kalmashapada) became freed from the 
curse. And (then one day) he went to his 
wife Madayanti in her season, but she pre¬ 
vented him. 

25. Maddened by desire, the kmg had no 
recollection of the curse. Hearing tne words 
of the lady (his wife), that best of kings be¬ 
came very much alarmed. 

26. O best of kings, recollecting the 
curse, he was very sorry for what he had 
done. It was for this reason and on account 
of the Brahmani's curse the king appointed 
Vashistha to beget a son on his wife. 

thus ends the hundred and eighty-fourth 
Section , the history of Vashistha j in the 
Chaitraratha of the Adi Parva 



ADI PARVA. 


Section CLXXXV. 

(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— 

Arjuna said:— 

1. O Gandharva, you are acquainted 
with every thing. Tell us therefore what 
Veda-knowing Brahmana is fit .to be ap¬ 
pointed as our priest ? 

The Gandharva said 

2. There is a shrine in this forest, it is 
called Utkachaka. The younger brother of 
Devala, Dhaumya, is engaged there in 
ascetic penances. If you desire, you can 
appoint him as your priest. 

Vaishampay ana said 

3. Then Arjuna, being highly pleased, 
gave the Gandharva his fire-weapon with 
due ceremonials ; and he thus spoke to him, 

4. “ O best of the Gandharvas, let the 
horses you give us remain with you for. 
sometime. When the time will come, we 
shall take them from you. Then he said 
to him, “Be blessed” “Be blessed.“ 

5. Then the Gandharva and the Panda- 
vas, respectfully saluting one another, left 
the charming banks of the Bhagirathi and 
went away wherever they liked. 

6. Thereupon, O descendant of Bharata, 
the Pandavas went to the shrine of Utka¬ 
chaka and to the hermitage of Dhaumya. 
They then installed Dhaumya as their 
priest. 

7. Dhaumya, the foremost of all men 
learned in the Vedas, received them with 
the offerings of wild fruits and roots and 
consented to be their priest. 

8—9. Having obtained that Brahmana 
as their priest, the Pandavas with their 
mother, constituting the sixth of the party, 
thought their wealth and kingdom had been 
already regained and the daughter of the 
Panchala King already obtained in the 
Saimvara. Those best of the Bharata race, 
having obtained the preceptor Dhaumya as 
their priest, considered themselves as 
placed under a protector. 

10, The preceptor (Dhaumya) was ac¬ 
quainted with the mystery of the Vedas ; he 
was liberal-minded,—he made the virtue 
and all-knowing sons of Pritha his spiritual 
disciples. 

it. That Brahmana, seeing those heroes 
endued with intelligence, strength, and 
perseverence like the celestials, considered 
that they were already restored to their 
wealth and sovereignty by virtue of their 
own accomplishments. 


15 

12. Benedictions ’having been uttered on 
them by that Brahmana, those kings of 
men resolved to go with him to the Saim¬ 
vara in the country of the Panchalas. 

thus ends the hundred and eighty fifth 
Section , the appointment of Dhaumya a» 
priest , in the Chaitraratha of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section CLXXXVI. 
(CHAITRARATHA PARVA)— Contd. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Then those best men, the five Pan- 
dava brothers, set out to see Draupadi, 
the (Panchala) country and the festivities 
(of Saimvara.) 

2. Those best of men, those chastisers of 
foes, saw with their mother many Brah- 
manas on their way going together (towards 
Panchala). 

3. O king, those Brahmacharis , those 
Brahmanas, asked the Pandavas, “Where 
are you going ? Whence have you come ? M 

Yudhishthira said 

4. O best of the twice-born, know, Sirs, 
that we are five brothers travelling with our 
mother. We are now coming from Eka- 
chakra. 

The Brahmanas said 

5. Go even this very day to the house of 
the Panchala Drupada. There will be held 
a great Saimvara , in which a large sum of 
money will be spent. 

6. We are going there ; let us go together. 
Extraordinary festivities will take place 
there. 

7. The daughter of the illustrious Jag- 
masena Drupada was born from the sacri¬ 
ficial altar, with eyes like lotus leaves, 

8. With features faultless, and with 
beauty, youth and intelligence ; she is the 
sister of the powerful Dhristadyumna, the 
(would be) slayer of Drona, 

9. Who rose as a mighty-armed hero 
with natural armour, sword, boW and arrows 
from the blazing fire,—himself looking like a 
second fire. 

10. His sister is the slender waisted and 
fauldess featured Draupadi, whose body 
emits the perfume of lotus over full two 
miles around. 

11. That daughter of Jagmasena will 
select a husband in a Saimvara . We are 
going there to see her and witness the great 
celestial-like festivities. 



mahabharata. 


156 


12. The kings and princes who are per¬ 
formers of sacrifices in which Dhakshina is 
large, who are devoted to study, who are 
pure, who are high-souled and vow-observ¬ 
ing, 

13. Who are young and handsome, who 
are great car warriors and accomplished in 
arms, will all be present there from various 
countries. 

14. Being desifou; of victory (to be suc¬ 
cessful in obtaining Draupadi) those kings, 
will all give away much wealth, kine, food 
and other articles of enjoyments. 

15. Taking all that they will give, seeing 
the; Saimvara and enjoying the festivities, 
we shall then go wherever we like. 

16. There will come (in that Saimvara) 
from many countries, the actors, the singers 
of king’s penegeries, the dancers, the reciters 
of Puranas, the heralds and the powerful 
athelets. 

17. O high-souled men, seeing all these 
wonderful sights and taking what will be 
given away, you will also return with us. 

18. You are handsome, you look all like 
the celestials; it may be that seeing you, 
Krishna may chose some one amongst you, 
superior to the rest, (as her l.u >band), 

19. Your this brother is handsome 
and is endued with beauty; he is also 
mighty-armed ; engaged in (athletic) en¬ 
counters,) he may by chance earn great 
wealth. 

YudHsthira said 

20. We shall all go with you to see 
that great festivity, that Saimvara of (the 
Panchala) maiden. 

thus ends the hundred and the eighty 
sixth Section , the departure of the Pandava , 
in the Saimvara of the Adi rarva . 


Section CLXXXVI I. 

(SAIMVARA P\RVA)-Continued. 

V&ishampayana said 

t. O Janamejaya, having been thus 
addressed, the Pandavas proceeded towards 
the Southern Panchala country, ruled over 
by the king Drupada. 

2. On their way the heroic Pandavas 
saw the illustrious, the pure-souled and the 
perfectly sinless Rishi Dwaipayana. 

3» Duly worshipping the Rishi and being 
saluted by him,—when their conversation 
came to a close, they proceeded by his com¬ 
mand to the palace of Drupada. 


4. Those great car-warriors slowly 
walked on, stopping on forests and on (the 
banks of) lakes which they found to be 
charming. 

5. The sons of Pandu, devoted in study t 
amiable, sweet-speeched and pure in acts, 
at last arrived in the country of the Pancha- 
las. 

6. After seeing the city and also the 
barracks, the Pandavas, took up there quar- 
ters in a potter’s house. 

7. Adopting the life of the Brahmanas f 
they begged their food there (in that city). 
No man recognised those horoes when they 
stopped there. 

8. Jagmasena always cherished the wish 
of bestowing (his daughter) Krishna on 
Kiriti (Arjuna), the son of Pandu, but he 
never spoke it to any body. 

9. O Janamejaya, O descendant of;Bha- 
rata, thinking ef the son of Kunti (Arjuna), 
the Panchala king caused a very stifiF bow 
to be made incapable of being bent by any 
man except Arjuna. 

10. Causing a machinery to be erected 
in the sky, the king set up a mark to be 
shot through that machinery. 

Drupada said:— 

11. He, who will string this bow, and 
he who will be able to shoot the mark above 
the machinary with these ornamented 
arrows, will obtain my daughter. 

Vaishampayana said 

12. With these words, the king Drupada 
proclaimed the Saimvara . Q descendant of 
Bharata, having heard this, all the kings 
came there. 

13. There came also many illustrious 
Rishis desirous of seeing the Saimvara. O 
king, Duryodhana and the Kurus, 
accorapained by Karna, also came there. 

14. There came also many illustrious. 
Brahmanas from many countries. The 
kings and princes were duly worshipped by 
the illustrious Drupada. 

15. All the citizens,—making a deep 
noise as that of the ocean,— took their seats 
on the platforms with the desire of seeing the 
Saimvara . 

16. The kings and princes entered the 
palace (of Saimvara) through the north east 
gate. The arena was built on a plane and 
on an auspicious ground on the north east of 
the city. The Samajbata (arena) was 
surrounded by palaces, and it was enclosed 
on all sides by a wall and a moat,—it was 
ornamented with gates and arches, and 
covered all over with a beautiful canopy. 



ADI PARVA. 




\ 


tft. It resounded with the notes of thou¬ 
sands of tRurupets,—it was scented with 
Aguru (black aloe), ornamented with 
garlands and sprinkled with the sandal 
Water paste. 

ip. It was surrounded on all sides by 
high and white mansions looking like the 
cloud-kissing peaks of the Kailasha (moun¬ 
tain) 

20. Their windows were covered with 
tiet-works of gold and their walls set with 
diamonds ana precious stones. Their stair¬ 
cases were easy of ascent, and the floors were 
covered with rich carpets and robes. 

21. They were scented wkh Aguru , and 
adorned with wreaths and garlands of flow¬ 
ers ; they were all white ana spotless like the 
necks of the swans. Their fragrance could be 
perceived from a Yoyona. 

22. Each of then) contained one hundred 
doors wide enough to admit a crowd all at 
once; they were adorned with costly beds 
Ornamented with various metals; they looked 
like the peaks of the Himalayas. 

23. In them lived all the kings, adorned 
with various kinds of ornaments, and each 
boasting to get possession of the maiden. 


24—26. When those best of kings, who 
w :re adorned with the fragrant paste of 
Aguru f who were greatly powerful, noble- 
minded, liberal, devoted to Brahmanas, 
beloved of the whole world for their 
good deeds and the protectors of their 
kingdoms, took their respective seats, the 
people of the city and the country who 
bad come to see Krishna and who had al¬ 
ready taken their seats on the excellent plat¬ 
forms all around saw them. 


27. The Pandavas sat there in the arena 
with the Brahmanas and saw the great 
affluence of the Panchala king. 

28. O king, that assemblage daily in¬ 
creased (in bulk,) and it looked gay with 
(the performances of) actors and dancers. 
Large presents of wealth were also made. 

29—30. When this grand assembly con¬ 
tinued (for 15 days,) then on the sixteenth 
day, O best of the Bharata race, Draupadi, 
having bathed, attired In the best robes 
and adorned with all ornaments, entered 
the arena carrying in her hand a golden 
dish on which there were a garland of flowers 
and other offerings of the Arghya, 

31. The priest of the lunar race,—that 
holy Brahmana learned in the Mantras,— 
kindling the sacrificial fire in all due forms 
poured libations of Ghee. 

32. Gratifying Agni and making the 
Brahmanas utter the formula of benediction, 
he stopped all the musical instRuruents (that 
Were then being played) all around. 


33 


33—34. O king, when the arena became 
perfectly still, Dhristadyumna, possessing 
a voice like that of kettle-dRurus or clouds, 
taking hold of his sister's arm, stood in the 
midst of the assembly and spoke these sweet 
words of excellent import with a voice as 
that of the clouds. 

Dhristadyumna said:— 

35. Hear, O ye assembled kings,—» 
this is the bow, that is the mark, and these 
are the arrows. Shoot the mark through 
the oriftee of the machine with these fine 
sharp arrows. 

36. Truly do I say,—he who possessing 
noble birth, beauty and strength will 
achieve this great feat, shall obtain to-day 
for his wife triis my sister Krishna. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

37. Having thus addressed the assem¬ 
bled kings, Drupada’s son (^Dhristadyumna) 
then spoke thus to his sister, reciting to 
her the names and the lineage and the 
achievements of those assembled potentates. 

thus ends the hundred and eighty seventh 
chapter, the words of Dhristadyumna , in 
the Saimvara of the Adi Parvn. 


Section CLXXXVIlf. 

(SAIMVARA PARVA)— Contd. 

Dhristadyumna said:— 

I. Duryodhana, Durvishaha, Durmukha, 
Dushpradharsana, Vivensati, Vikarna, 
Saha, Dushashena, 

2 Yuyutsu, Vayuviga, Bhima, Viga- 
rava, Ugrayudha, Valaki, Kanakayu, Viro- 
chona, 

3. Sukundala, Chitrasena, Suvarcha, 
Kanakadhwaia, Nandaka, Vahusali, Tu- 
handa, Vikakala,— 

4. These and others are the greatly 
powerful sons of Dhritarashtra. These 
heroes have all come with Karna for your 
hands. 

5. Numerous other illustrious kings,—• 
the best of Kshatriyas, ^have also come for 
you). Shakuni, Sauvaia, Vrishaka, Vrihad- 
vala, 

64 These sorts of the king of Gandhara 
have also come. The foremost of all wtelders 
of arms, Ashwathama and Bhoja 

7. Have come here adorned with every 
ornament. The kings, Vrihanta, Manimana, 
Dandadhara, 

8. Sahadeva, Jayatserta, Meghasandhi, 
Virata with his two sons, Sankhya and 
Uttara, 



2 $8 


MAHABHARATA. 


9. Vardhakshemi, Susarma, Seuaviodu, 
Suketu with his two sons, Surama and 
Suvarcha, 

10. Suchitra, Sukumara, Vrika, Satya- 
dhriti, Suyadhiraja, Rochamana, Nila, 
Chitrayudha, 

11. Angsumana, Chekitana, the mighty 

Srinimana, Chandrasena, the son of the 
mighty Suvadrasena both the father and 
the son, 

12. Jalasandha, Vadanda, Danda, Pan- 
draka, Vasudeva, the mighty Bhagadatta, 

13. Kalinga, Tamralipta, the king of 
Pattana, the king of Madra, the great car- 
warrior Shalya with his son, 

14. The heroic Rukmangada, Rukma- 
ratha, Somodatta of the Kuru race with 
his three sons, 

15. All great heroes and car-warriors, 
all these have assembled here. Bhuri, 
Bhurisrava, Sala, Sudakshina, Kambhoja, 
the Paurava Dridawnhauwa, 

16. Brihatvala, Sushena, Sivi, the son 
of Ushinara, Patacharnihanta, the king of 
Karusah, 

17. Sankersana, (Valadeva) Vasudeva 
(Krishna), the mighty son of Rukmini, 
Samva, Charudeshna, the son of Pradyumna, 
Gada, 

18. Akrura, Satyaki, the high-souled 
Uddhava, Kritavarma, the son of Hrideka, 
Pritha, Vipritha, 

19. Viduratha, Kanka, Sanka, Gava- 
shna, Ashavaha, Aniruddha, Samika, 
Saranyaya, 

20. Heroic Vatapati, Jellaha, Pundaraka, 
the powerful Ushinara,—all these are known 
as Vrishnis, 

21. Bhagiratha, Vrihatkshatra, the son 
of Sindhu, Jayadratha, Vrihatratha, Valhika, 
the great car-warrior Srutaya, 

22. Uluka, Kaitava, Chitrangada, 
Suvangada, the intelligent Vatsaruga, the 
king 0? Kosala, 

23. Sishupala,—the powerful Jarasandha, 
—these and many other kings, of many 
countries 

24. And all the Kshatriyas celebrated 
in the worldr O amiable sister, have come for 
your hand. O blessed girl, these powerful 
men will (tty to) shoot the mark. Among 
these (heroes) you shall choose him as your 
husband who will (be able to) shoot the 
mark, 

thus ends the hundred and eighty eighth 
chapter, the recitations of the king/ lineage, 
in the Saimvara of the Adi Parva . 


Section CLXXXIX. 

(SAIMVARA PARVA)— Contd, 

Vaish ampayana said 

1. These youthful princes," adorned with 
ear-rings, boasted at one another; and each 
regarding himself as the most accomplished 
in arms and endued with prowess th«y 
stood up brandishing their weapons. 

2—3. Intoxicated withthe pride of 
beauty, prowess, lineage, knowledge, wealth 
and youth, they were like the Himalayan 
elephants mad in the season of rut. Staring 
at one another with jealousy, and being 
influenced by the god of desire, they 
suddenly rose up from their royal seats, each 
exclaiming, M Krishna will be mine." 

4. Those Kshatriyas, assembled in that 
arena, each eagerly desiring to win the 
daughter of Drupada, appeared like the 
celestials standing round Uma, the daughter 
of the Mountain king. 

5. Their bodies being afflicted with the 
arrows of the god of love, and their hearts 
completely lost in Krishna (Draupadi), the 
kings descended into the arena; and they 
felt jealousy against even their own friends 
for the sake of the daughter of Drupada. 

6. There came also fin the sky) the 
celestials on their cars, with the Rudras, the 
Adityas, the Vasus, the i.vin Ashwinis, the 
Sadhyas, all the Maruta and the lord of 
wealth (Kuvera) with Yama at their head. 

7. There came also the Daityas, the 
Suparnas, the great Nagas. the celestial 
Rishis, the Guhakas, the C harunas, Vishwa- 
vashu, N.irada, Parva:ya, and the chief 
Gandharvas^wrth the Apsaras. 

8. Halayuda, (Valarama) Janardana 
(Krishna), the chiefs of the Vrishni, 
Andhaka and Yadava tribes, all ever 
obedient to Krishna,—were also there view¬ 
ing the scene. 

9. Seeing these five (Pandavas) like 
mad elephants,—the best of their species— 
which come attracted . towards a lake over¬ 
grown with lotuses, like fire covered with 
ashes and, the foremost of the Yadus, 
Krishna, began to reflect. 

10. He said to Rama (Balarama), 11 That 
is Yudhishthira, that is Bhima with Jtshmi 
(Arjuna), and these are the two heroic twins 
(NaKulaand Sahadeva). • Observing them 
slowly (one after the other) (Vala) Rama 
cast a pleased glance on Janardana 
(Krishna). 

11. Biting their nether lips in wrath, the 
other heroes, those sons and grandsons of 
kings, with their eyes, hearts and thoughts 



ADI PARVA. 


259 


•et cm Krishna alone, looked at Drupada 
only with their expanded eyes and did not 
fiotiec the Pandavas. 

12. On seeing Draupadi the mighty 
tinned sons of Pritha and also the heroic 
and the illustrious twins were all struck with 
the arrows of the god of love. 

13—H- Crowded with celestials, Rishis 
Gandharvas, Supumas, Nagas, Asuras, 
and Sidhyas, filled with the celestial per¬ 
fumes, scattered over with celestial flowers, 
resounding with the kettle-dRurus and the 
deep hum of infinite voices and echoing wnth 
the softer music of the flute, the Bina and 
the tabor, the cars of the celestials could 
scarcely find a way through the firmament. 

15—16. Then those kings,—Karna, 
Duryodhana, Salwa, Shalya, Ashwathama, 
Sunitha, Vakra, the ruler of 
Kalinga and Banga, Paudya, Paundra, the 
ruler of Videha, the chief of the Yavanas. 
and many other sons and grandsons of 
kings,—the rulers of countries with eyes 
Hkc lotus leaves,—one after the other 
exhibited their own prowess for (winning) 
that maiden of matchless beauty. 

17. Adorned with crowms, garlands, bra¬ 
celets and other ornaments, possessing 
mighty arms, prowess, and vigour, and full 
of strength and energy, 
tasting a glance towards the sun, Karna 
threw aside the bow already drawn to a circle. 

74. When all those assembled kings 
gave up the task, the heroic king of the 
Chedis as powerful as Yama, 

25. The high-souled and determined sort 
of Damoghosna, Shishupala, attempted 
to string the bow, but he nimself fell on his 
knees on the ground. 

26. Thereupon the greatly strong and 
powerful king Jarasanaha came to the bow 
and stood there for some time, fixed and 
motionless like a mountain. 

27. Tossed by the bow he too fell upon 
his knees on the ground. Rising up, he 
(at once) left for his own kingdom. 

28. Then in attempting to string the bow 
the great hero Shalya, the greatly powerful 
king of Madra, also fell upon his knees on 
the ground. 

29. At last when that assemblage of 
kings of noble births became the subjects 
of derisive talk, that foremost of heroes 
Jishnu (Arjuna), the son of Kunti, desired 
to string the bow and place the arrows 
on the string. 

thus ends the hundred and eighty ninth 
Section , the discomfiture of the kings, in the 
Sa ini vara of the Adi Parva. 


18—19. Those kings could not even in their 
imagination string that bow of extraordinary 
stiffness. And those kings, in exerting with 
swelling lips to string that bow—each ac¬ 
cording to his strength, education, skill and 
energy,—were all tossed on the ground and 
lay motionless for some time. Their strength 
gone, and their crowns and garlands Ico >ened 
from their persons, they panted for breath. 
Their ambition for wining that maiden was 
soon cooled down. Tossed by that stiff bow, 
their garlands and bracelets and other orna¬ 
ments, were disordered and they uttered 
exclamations of woe. Having their hope 
of obtaining Krishna gone that assemblage 
of kings looked sad and woeful. 

at. Seeing the plight of all those kings, 
that foremost of all wielders of bow, Karna, 
went to the place where the bow was. He 
qutckfy raised it up, stringed it and placed 
tlie arrows on the string. 

22. Seeing the son of Surya,—Karna of 
the Suta tribe,—who was like a fire or moon 
or the sun,—resolved to shoot the mark, 
those foremost of bowmen, the Pandavas, 
considered that the mark had already been 
shot and brought down to the ground. 

23. Seeing him Draupadi said in a loud 
voice, ' I shall not choose a Suta for my 
husband.” Laughing in vexation and 


Section CXC. 
(SAIMVARA PARVA).— Contd. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

1. When all the kings desisted from the 
attempt to string the bow, the high-souleJ 

i ishnu (Arjuna) rose from among the 
trahmanas. 

2. Seeing him (Arjuna) possess the 
complexion of Indra’s banner and obser¬ 
ving that he was advancing towards the 
bow, the chief Brahmanas made a loud 
uproar by shaking their deer-skins. 

3. While ‘ some of them were pleased, 
others were displeased and some among 
them possessing intelligence and foresight 
talked to one another thus, 

4—5. “How can a stripling of a Brahmana 
unpractised in arinfc and weak in strength, 
string that bow which such celebrated 
Kshatriyas like Shalya and others endued 
with great might and accomplished in the 
science and practice of arms could not 
string ? 

6. If he fails to achieve success in the 
act which he has undertaken by his boyish 
restlessness the Brahmanas will be ridicul¬ 
ous in the eyes of all the kings. 



MABASHARATA. 


t 60 


7. therefore stop this Brahmana and 
prevent him from attempting to string the 
bow, which he (surely) desires to do out of 
vanity, childish daring, and mere restless¬ 
ness. 

The Brahmana said s— 

8 . We shall not be ridiculous, nor shall we 
incur the disrespect of any body, or the 
displeasure of the sovereigns 

Vaishampayana said 

9. The others said,—This handsome 
youth, who is like a trunk of a mighty 
elephant, whose shoulders, arms and thighs 
are ao welhbuilt, who in patience looks hke 
the Himalayas, 

10. Whose gait Is like that of the Hon, 
whose prowess i9 like that of a mad elephant, 
and who is so resolute, will probably accom¬ 
plish the feat. 

11—12. He has (surely great) strength 
and great energy, else he would not have 
gone of his own accord. There is no¬ 
thing in tbe three worlds that Brahmanas 
among all mortal men cannot accomplish. 
Abstaining from fdod, living on air, eating 
fruits, observing severe vows, 

13. And becoming emaciated and weak, 
the Brahmanas are ever strong in their own 
energy. A Brahmana should never be 
disregarded whether Ns acts be right or 
Wrong, 

14. Node should consider him Incapable 
Of achieving any task that is great or little, 
blissful or woeful. All the Rshatryas were 
defeated in battle by Rama, the son of 
Jamadagni. 

15—16# Ag#sta drank up the unfathom¬ 
able ocean by nis Brahma might therefore 
say,— M Let this youth bend the bow and 
string it with ease. ]' The best of the 
Brahmanas said, " Be it so'. The Brahmanas 
continued to talk thus to one another and 
on various matters. 

17. Arjuna came to the bow and stood 
there like a mountain. Walking round that 
bow in due form, 

18. Bowing His head to the giver of 
boons,—lord Ishana,r-and remembering 
Krishna in his mind, he took up the bow. 

19. The bow which ftukma, Stjnita, 
Valera, Radha's son (Karna), Duryodhana 
Shalya, and many other kings, accomplished 
in tne science and practice of arras, could 
not string, even with great exertion, was 
Stringed within the twinkling of an eye, 

20. By Arjuna, the son of Indra, that 
foremost of alt powerful men, that hero as 
powerful as the younger brother of Indra. 
He took up the five arrows, 


21. Shot the mark, and caused it to com# 
down on the ground through the orifice in 
the machinery above over which it had been 
placed. 

22. Thereupon rose a great uproar in 
the sky and also a great clamour in the 
arena. 

23. The celestials showered celestia- 
flowers on the head of that slayer of foes 
Arjuna,. thousands of Brahmanas waved 
their upper garments in joy. 

24. The assembled kings uttered excla¬ 
mations of grief and despair. Flowers were 
rained from the sky all over the arena. 

25. The musicians struck up m concert 
hundreds of dRurus and tRurupets. The bard 
and the heralds began to chaunt the praise 
of the hero in sweet strain. 

26. Seeing him (Arjuna), that chastiser 
of foes, Drupada, became exceedingly glad, 
and he desired to assist Partha with his 
army if occasion arose. 

27. When tbe uproar was at its highest, 
that foremost of all virtuous men, Yudhishthira 
accompanied by those foremost of men, the 
twins, soon left the arena to return to his 
lodging. 

28. Seeing the mark shot and seeing 
also Partha who had shot the mark like 
Indra himself, Krishna (Draupadi) was filled 
with joy; and she came to the son of Knmi 
with a white robe and a garland of flowers. 

29. That accomplishes of inconceivable 
feats, having won her in the arena, 
was saluted with reverence by all the Brah¬ 
manas. He soon after left tbe arena and 
was followed by her who thus became his 
wife. 

thus ends the hundred and nintietk 
Section the hitting the mark , in the Sim+ 
vara of the Adi Parva . 


Section C XCI 

(SAIMVARA PARVA)— Contd. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. When the king expressed his desire to 
bestow his daughter on that Brahmana, all 
the assembled kings looked at one another 
and were filled with wrath. 

The Kings wid:— 

2. Passing us by and regarding the as 
sembled potentates as straw, this Drupada 
desires to bestow his daughter, the best of 
women, on a Brahmana 

3. Having planted the tree, he cuts it 
down when it is about to bear fruits. Tbe 



ADI PARVA. 


wretch does not respect us,—therefore'let us 
kill him. 

4 He does not deserve our respect or the 
veneration due to his age. On account of 
such conduct, we shall kill this wretch who 
insults kings with their sons. 

5. After inviting all the kings and enter¬ 
taining them with excellent food, he at last 
insults them all. 

6. In this assemblage of monarchs which 
is like a conclave of the celestials, does he not 
find a single king who is equal to himself ? 

7. The Sruti says that the Saintvara is 
for the Kshatriyas; the Brhamanas have no 
claim in a selection of husband (by a 
Kshatriya lady). 

8. O kings, if this maiden does not 
desire to select one of us as her husband, 
let us throw her into fire and return to our 
kingdoms. 

9. though this Brahmana has done 
this injury to the kings out of his officiousness 
or avarice, he should not be still killed. 

10. For our kingdoms, lives, wealth, sons 
and grandsons and whatever other wealth 
we have (in this world) all exist for the 
Brahman as. 

11. Something must be done (however) 
so that from the fear of disgrace and from 
the desire of maintaining that which proper¬ 
ly belongs to the respective orders, (the 
impertinent interference of Brahmanas) may 
not cause other Saimvaras to end thus. 

12. Having said this, those best of kings, 
having arms like the spiked iron maces, 
took up their weapons and rushed upon 
Drupada to kill him. 

13. Seeing those kings all rushing upon 
him t in anger with bows and arrows, 
Drupada sought the protection of the 
Brahmanas from fear. 


14. But those great bowmen, those two 
sons of Pandu (Bhima and Arjuna), those 
chastisers of foes, (at once) advanced to op¬ 
pose those kings rushing towards Drupada 
like mad elephants. 


15. 'Diereupon all those kings and 
princes with their fingures cased in leather 
and their weapons upraised, rushed in anger 
towards the Karu princes, Bhima and 
Arjuna. 


16. Then the powerful Bhima of extra¬ 
ordinary deeds, possessing the strength of 
thunder, tore up a large tree like an elephant 
and that devisted it of its all leaves. 


17. Taking that tree,The mighty-armed 
Bhima, the son of Pritha, the chastiser of all 
foes, stood, like Yama with his fearful staff, 
pear that 4 bcst of men Partha (Arjuna.) 


H6t 

18. Seeing that feat of his brother, the 
greatly intelligent Jishnu (Arjuna), himself 
being of inconceivable feats, became very 
much astonished. Being equal to Indra in 
achievements, he cast oft all his fear9 ; and 
he stood ready with his bow to receive those 
assailants. 

19. Seeing the feats of both Jishnu 
(Arjuna) and his brother, Damodara (Kri-" 
shna) of super-human intelligence and in- 
concievable feats, spoke thu9 to his brother 
Halayuda (Valarama) of fearful eneigy. 

, 20 - . 9., Sankarsana, that hero who has 
the gait like that of a great lion, who draws 
the large bow in his hand, which is full four 
cubits in length, is undoubtedly Arjuna. 
If I am the son of Vasudeva there is no 
doubt about it. 

21. That hero, who has suddenly tom up 
the tree and who has within a moment 
become ready to drive away the monarchs, 
is undoubtedly Vrikodara (Bhima). None 
else in the world could have performed 
to-day such a feat in the field of battle. 

2? V« A< % uta » t ^ ie other youth, having 
eyes like lotus leaves, who is full four cubits 
tall, who hat the gait of a mighty lion, 
who is humble, fair-complexioned, with 
prominent and shinning nose, whoa moment 
I before has left the arena, is undoubtedly the 
son of Dharma (Yudhishthira). 

23. The two other youths, each as hand¬ 
some as Kartikeya, are, I am sure, the son of 
the twin Aswinis. I heard that the sons of 
Pandu and Pritha had escaped from the fire 
of the lac house. 

24. Then Halayuda of the complexion of 
clouds charged with rains spoke thus to his 
younger brother in joy, “lam glad to hear 
that our father’s sister Pritha, with the fore¬ 
most of the Kuru princes (the Pandavas) 
has escaped (from the lac-house). 

thus ends the hundred and ninty first 
Section , the words of Krishna, in the Sflim- , 
vara of the Adi Parva, 

. .1 . . 


Section CXCri. 

(SAIMVARA PARVA )-r-Contd. 



1. Those best of Brahmanas (present 
there), shaking their deer-skins and coco¬ 
nut shell-water-pots/exclaimed, “ Fear not; 
we shall fight with the foes. ” 

2. Arjuna smilingly told those Brahma¬ 
nas who spoke to him 11 Stand aside as 
spectators. 



MAHABHAKATA. 


5 

3. I shall check all these kings, like 
snakes by Mantras , showering on them 
arrows furnished with sharp points.” 

' 4. Having said this, the mighty Arjuna 
took up the bow he had obtained as the 
dower, and accompanied by his brother 
Bhima, stood immovable as a mountain. 

5. Seeing the Kshatriyas, ever furious 
in battle, with Karna at their head, the 
two heroic brothers rushed at them like two 
elephants rushing against a herd of hostile 
elephants 

6. Then those kings, eager for battle, 
fiercely exclaimed, 44 Killing a Brahmana 
desirous of fighting in battle is permitted.” 

7. Saying this, the monarchs at once 
rushed upon the Brahmanas, and the greatly 
powerful Karna rushed against Jishnu 
(Arjuna) to fight. 

8. The mighty fking of the Madras, 
Shalya rushed against Bhima like one 
elephant rushing against another for a 
female one. 

9. Durvodhana and others all fought 
with the Brahmanas,—but they skirmshed 
with them lightly and carelessly. 

10. Then the illustrious Arjuna, seeing 
the son of Vikartana, Karna, coming 
towards him, drew his tough bow and 
pierced him with his sharp arrows. 

11. The son of Radha (Karna), being 
much pestered by his swift, powerful and 
effulgent arrows, attacked Arjuna with 
more care (than before) 

12. Then Karna and Arjuna, both 
foremost of all warriors, fought madly on,— 
eAch eager to vanquish the other. Such 
was the lightness of hand they displayed 
that they both became invisible (on account 
of the incessant showers of arrows).” 

13. “ Behold the strength of my arms, 
11 Mark how 1 have counteracted your feats, ” 
they addressed each other in such words,— 
intelligible only to the heroes. 

14. Enraged on seeing the strength 
and energy of Arjuna’s arms as matchless 
in the earth, the son of Surya, Karna, 
fought with greater vigour. 

15. Parrying all the swift and strong 
arrows shot at him by Arjuna, Karna sent 
up a loud shout. And his great feat was 
applauded by all the warriors. 

Xante, said:— 

r6. O' foremost of the Brahmanas, I 
am pleased to sec the strength of your 
arms, that know no relaxation in battle. 
Your weapons are worthy of achieving 
victory. 


17. Is the science of arms peflwmfied 
irf you, or are you that best of Brahmanas 
(l’afashu)Rama or Indra himself or Vishnu, 
or Achyuta himself ? 

18. In order to conceal your personality 
have you assumed the form of a Brahmana, 
and mastering all the strength of arms are 
you now fighttng with me ? 

19. None except Sachi's husband (Indra) 
or Kiriti (Arjuna), the son of Panduis capa¬ 
ble of fighting with me when I am angry on 
the field of battle. 

Vaishampayana laid 

20. Hearing his these words, Falgunt 
(Arjuna) replied,  4 O Karna,l am not the 
science of arms ; 1 am not also the powerful 
Rama. 

21. Iam only a Brahmana who is the 
foremost of alt wielders of arms. By the 
grace of my preceptor, I have become expert 
in the Brahma and Paurandra weapons. 
I am here to-day to vanquish you in battle. 
O hero, wait a little.” 

22. Having been thus addressed, the 
son of Radha, Karna, refrained from the 
fight, for the great car-warrior thought that 
the Brahma might is ever invincible. 

23. On another part of the field the 
mighty heroes Shalya and Vrikodara (Bhima) 
endued with great strength, well skilled in 
battle and learning, 

24. Challenged one another and fought 
like two mad elephants, striking each other 
with their clenched fists and knees. 

25. Sometimes pushing each other to a 
distance, sometimes dragging each other 
near; sometimes throwing eadi other down 
with their faces down-wards and sometimes 
on their sides, they fought on, striking each 
other at times with the clenched fists. 

26. As they fought each other with blows 
hard as the clash of two pieces of stones, the 
arena ran^ with the sound of their combat. 

27—28. Fighting thus in the battle for a 
few minutes, Bhima, the best of the Kurus, 
then taking up Shalya on his arms, hurled 
him to a distance, and the best of men 
Bhimasena surprised all (by his feat), for 
though he threw the powerful Shalya On the 
ground, he did not hurt him much. 

29. When Shalya was thus thrown.down 
by Bhima, and Karna was struck with fear, 
all the other kings were filled with awe, and 
they surrounded Vrikodara (Bhima from 
all sides), 

30. They said, 11 Surely these ^best of 
Brahmanas are excellent (warriors). As¬ 
certain in what tribe they have been boro t 
and where they live. 



AD! PARVA. 


263 


31. Who is capable of fighting with the 
son of Rad ha, Karna, in battle except 
Rama, Drona or Kiriti, the son of Pandu 
(Arjuna)? 

за. Who is capable of fighting m battle 
with Ouryodhana except the son of Devaki, 
Krishna, and the son of Saradwan, Kripa ? 

33 — 34  Who is capable of overthrowing 
in bat tie the king of Madra, Shalya, the fore¬ 
most of great warriors, except Valadeva, 
the heroic Vrikodara, the son of Pandu, and 
Che heroic Duryodhana ? therefore, let us 
desist from this fight with the Brahmanas. 

35. Brahmanas, if they be offending, 
should still ever be protected. First let us 
ascertain who these (heroes) are. After 
we have learnt it, we may cheerfully fight 
with them 

Vaishampayana said 

зб. Seeing that feat of Bhima, Krishna 
believed them both to be the sons of Kunti. 
Gently addressing the assembled monarchs 
by saying, 41 This maiden has been greatly 
won (by the Brahmanas)” he induced them 
to desist from the fight. 

37. Having thus desisted from the 
battle, those best of monarchs, those (heroes) 
well-skilled in battle, returned to their res¬ 
pective kingdoms,—all becoming exceed¬ 
ingly surprised. 

38. Those that assembled there went 
away saying that the Brahmanas had 
become victorious to-day; the princess of 
Panchala had become the bride of a Brah- 
mana. 

39. Surrounded by Brahmanas attired 
in skins of deer and other wild animals, 
Bhima and Dhananjaya passed through the 
crowd with good deal of difficulty. 

40—41. Those heroes among men, 
mangled by the enemies and followed by 
Krishna, at last came out of the crowd, 
and they looked like the full moon or the sun 
emerged from the clouds. And their 
mother (Kunti in her lodging) began to 
think of various evils having overtaken her 
sons. 

42. Seeing that her sons were late in 
returning from their begging tour, she was 
filled with anxiety. At one time she thought 
that the sons of Dhritarashtra had recognised 
and killed them. 

43- Next she feared that some cruel and 
strong Rakshashas, endued with the prowess 
of deception, had killed them. And she asked 
herself, 1 ‘Could the illustrious Vyasa himself 
have been guided by perverse intelligence V 

44— 45. thus pondered Pritha out of 
her affection for her children. Then in 


the stillness of the late afternoon, Jishnu 
(Arjuna), accompanied with many Brah¬ 
manas, entered the potter’s house like 
the cloud-covered sun emerged from the 
clouds in a cloudy day. 

thus ends the hundred and ninety 
second Section , the return of the Pandavas, 
in the Satmvara of the Add Parva 


Section CXCIU. 
(SAIMVARA PARVA )-Contd. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Then those two illustrious sons of 
Pritha, returning to the potter’s house; came 
to their mother. And those best of nieiv 
represented Jagmaseni to their mother as 
the 44 Alms ” they had obtained that day.. 

2. Kunti who was within the room did 
not see her sons. She, therefore, replied 
saying, 44 Enjoy all of you (what you have 

? ot. ”) A moment after she saw Krishna; 

Draupadi) and said, 14 Alas! what have 1 - 
said ?” 

3. Being anxious with the fear of sin 
and reflecting how every one could be extri¬ 
cated from the situation, she took the cheer¬ 
ful Jagmaseni by the hand, and coming to 
Judhisthira, she said. . 

Kunti said 

4. This daughter of the king Jagmasena,. 
upon being represented to me by your 
younger brothers as the “ Alms” they had 
obtained, O king, from ignorance I said 
what was proper, namely, 44 Enjoy all of you 
what you have got.” 

5. O best of the Kurus, tell me how my 
speech may not become futile, how sin may 
not touch the daughter of the Panchala 
king, and how she may not become un¬ 
happy. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

6. Having been thus addressed by his 
mother, that foremost of the Kuru race, 
that hero, the intelligent king (Yudhishthira,) 
consoling Kunti, thus addressed Dhananjaya, 

7. 11 0 Falguni, Jagmaseni has been 

won by you. It is proper therefore that you 
should marry this princess. O withstands 
of all foes, therefore kindle the sacred fire and 
marry her with all due rites. ” 

Arjuna said 

8. O king, do not hurl me into si«w 
Your command is not in consonance with the 
precepts of virtue. That is the path followed 



264 


MAHABHARATA. 


by the sinful. You should rtlarry her, first, 
then the mighty armed Bhima of incon¬ 
ceivable feats. 

9. Then myself, then Nakula, and then 
last of all the greatly energetic Sahadeva. 
O king, Vrikodara, myself, the twins and 
the maiden all await your command. 

10. When such is the state of things, after 
due reflection do that Which is proper, 
consonant with virtue, productive of fame, 
and beneficial to the Panchala king. We 
are all obedient to you j command us as you 
like. 

Vaishampayana said 

11. Hearing these words df Jishrtu 
(Arjuna), so fml of respect and affection, 
the sons of Pandu all glanced at the Pan¬ 
chala princess. 

12. She too looked at them all. Glancing 
at the illustrious Krishna (Draupadi), they 
looked at one another, and taking their 9eats, 
they thought of her alone. 

in. When those immeasurably effulgent 
heroes looked at Draupadi, the god of love 
invaded their hearts and continued to grind 
all their senses. 

14. The charming beauty of the Pan¬ 
chala princess was modelled by the Creator 
himself. It was superior to all and charm¬ 
ing to all creatures. 

15. Seeing their demeanour and knowing 
what was passing through their minds, that 
best of men, the son of Kunti, Yudhishthira 
recollected the words of Dwaipayana. 

16. Fearing that there might arise dis¬ 
union amongst the brothers, the king 
(Yudhishthira) thus spoke, 44 This blessed 
Draupadi will be the wife of all of us.” 

Vaishampayana said 

17. Hearing these words of their eldest 
brother, the sons of Pandu began to ponder 
over them in their mind in great joy. 

18. The chief of the Vrishnis (Krishna), 
with the son of Rohini (Valarama) suspecting 
them to be the chief of the Kurus, came to 
the potter’s house where those best of men 
(the Pandavas) were living. 

19. Krishna with the son of "Rohini 
(Valarama) saw there seated Ajatsatru of 
well developed and long arms, and sitting 
round him were his younger brothers, 
surpassing the splendour of fire. 

20. Going to that foremost of all virtuous 
men, the son of Kunti, and touching the 
feet of that prince of the Ajamira race 
Yudhishthira, Vasudeva, (Krishna) then said, 
14 I am Krishna”. 


21. And the c on of Rohini (Valadeva) 
also coming to Yudhishthira did the same. 
Seeing Krishna and Valadeva, the Pandavas 
expressed their great delight. 

22. O foremost of the Bharata race, those 
Chiefs of the Yadu race (Krishna and 
Valarama) then touched the feet of (Kunti), 
the sister of their father. 

23. Seeing Krishna, Ajatsatru, that 
foremost of the kuru race, asked him his 
well-fate, and said 11 O Vasudeva, how 
have you been able to trace us, living as 
wc are in disguise ? M 

24. VasudeVa smilingly replied, 44 0 king, 
fire even if it is covered can easily be known. 
Who else among men except the Pandavas 
can perform such feats ? 

25. O Pandavas, O withstanders of foes, 
you have by sheer good fortune escaped 
from that fearful fire (of the lac-house), 
and also by sheer good fortune the sinful 
son of Dhritarashtra (Duryodhana) with his 
ministers have not succeeded in their (evil) 
wishes. 

/ 

26. Be blessed. Grow in prosperity as a 
fire in a cave gradually grows and spreads 
itself all around. Lest any of the kings 
recognise you, give us permission to return 
to our camp/ Then obtaining the permis¬ 
sion of the Padavas, Krishna of undying 
property, accompanied with Valadeva, soon 
went away, 

thus ends the hundred and ninety third 
Section , the arrival of Ram and Krishna^ 
in the Saimvara of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXCIV. 
(SAIMVARA PARVA)— Contd, 

Vaishampayana said 

1. When the two Kuru princes (Bhiiria 
and Arjuna) went towards the potter's 
house, the Panchala prince Dristyadumna 
followed them. 

2. Having sent away all his attendants, 
he concealed himself unknown to the Pandavas 
in a place somewhere near the house of 
the potter. 

3. That grinder of foes, Bhima, and 
Jishnu (Arjuna) and the high-souled twins 
returned in the evening from their begging 
tour; and they cheerfully offered everything 
to Yudhishthira. 

4. Thereupon the kind Kunti thus spoke 
to the daughter of the Panchala^ king, 44 O 
amiable girl, first take a portion of flits 
(food) and offer it to the gods and give it 
away to the Brahmanas. 



AD! PARVA. 265 


5—6. Feed (also) those that are hungry, 
and give it to those that are our guests. 
I>ivide the rest into two portions. O ami 
able girl, give the half to Bhima,—for this 
strong youth with fair complexion, a man 
like a king of elephants,—this hero always 
eats much. Divide the other half into six 
equal parts,-^-four for these youths 
(Yudhishthira, Arjuna, Nakula and Saha- 
deva) one for myself, and the other for you. 

Vaishampayana said 

7. Hearing these excellent words of her 
mother-in-law, the chaste princess, then 
cheerfully did all that she wa9 directed to do. 
And they then all partook of the food. 

8. Then the son of Madri, the ascetic 
Sahadeva, spread on the ground a bed of 
Kusha grass; thereupon those heroes all 
spread on it their deer-skins, and then they 
laid themselves down to sleep. 

9. The foremost of Kuru princes laid 
themselves down with their heads towards 
the south. Kunti laid herself down along 
the line of their heads, and Krishna 
( Draupadi) along that of their feet. 

10. though she lay on Kusha grass 
and on the ground, like the nether pillow 
of the sons of Pandu, yet she felt no grief in 
her heart or any disrespect for those best 
of the Kurus. 

11. Then those heroes began to talk to 
one another on celestial weapons, cars, 
elephants, swords, arrows and battle-axes. 
Their conversations were varied and were 
exceedingly interesting. 

1 2. The son of the Panchala-king (Dhrista- 
dyumna) heard all that they said in their 
conversations ; and all the men saw Krishna 
(Draupadi) in that state, 

13. (As soon as morning came), the 
prince Dhristadyumna set out in great haste 
towards (he palace in order to report to the 
king Drupaefa in detail what he had heard 
in the night as talked by those heroes 
among one another. 

14. The Panchala-king was sad, because 
he did not know that those that had taken 
away his daughter were the Pandavas. 
The illustrious (king) asked Dhristadyumna 
in his return, u Where has Krishna gone ? 
By whom has she been taken a}vay ? 

15. Has any Sudra, or any man of low 
birth, or any tribute-paying Vaisya placed 
his dirty feet on my head (by taking her 
away) ? Has the garland of flowers been 
thrown away on a Burning place for dead 
bodies? 

16. O son, has any Kshatriya of high 
birth, or any one of the superior order 
(Brahraana) obtained my daughter ? Has a 


man of low birth placed his left foot on my 
head by winning Krishna ? 

17. I shall not be sorry, but shall be very 
much pleased if my daughter has been uni¬ 
ted with that best of men, Partha. O illus¬ 
trious one, tell me truly who has to-day 
taken away ray daughter ? 

18. Are the sons of that foremost of the 
Kurus, Vichitrivirja’s sou (Panda), alive ? 
Was be Partha wko took up the bow and 
shot the mark ? ” 

thus ends the hundred and ninety fourth 
Section , the return of Dhristadyumna , in 
the Saimvara of the Adi Parva  


Section CXCV, 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA). 

Vaishampayana said. 

I. Having been thus addresser!, that 
foremost of the lunar race, the prince Dhrista¬ 
dyumna, cheerfully said to his father all 
that had happened and by whom Krishna 
(Draupadi) had been won. 

Dhristadyumna said r— 

2—3. The Youth with large and red 
eyes, who was attired in black deer-skin and 
looked like a celestial in beauty, who 
stringed the foremost of bows and brought 
down on earth the mark set on high, was 
soon surrounded by all the foremost of 
Brabmanas, who offered him their homage 
for the feat he had achieved. Incapable of 
bearing the sight of the foes and endued 
with great activity, he (the youth) displayed 
his prowess. Surrounded by the Brah- 
manas he resembled like the thunder- 
wielding Indra in the midst of the celestials 
and the Rishis. 

4. As a female elephant follows the 
leader of a herd, so Krishna cheerfully 
followed him, catching hold of his deer¬ 
skin. Being unable of bearing that sight 
the assembled kings rose up in anger and 
advanced to fight. 

5. O king, then there rose in the arena 
another hero, who tore up a large tree and 
rushed against the kings (felling them right 
and left), as angry Yama smites down all 
living creatures. 

6. O king, the assembled kings stood 
motionless looking at these two best of 
heroes among men. While they, resembling 
like the sun and the moon, took Krishna 
with them and went away to a potter's house 
(situated) outside Ihe city. 

7. There (in the potter’s house) sat a 
lady, as effulgent as, a flame of fire, who 


34 



266 


MAHABHARATA. 


I believe, is their mother. Around her also 
sat three foremost of men, each of whom was 
like a fire. 

8. Coming to her, the two heroes paid 
homage to her feet and asked Krishna “To do 
homage to her.” Keeping Krishna there, 
those foremost of men all went out in their 
begging tour. 

9. (When they returned), Krishna took 
from them the food (that they had obtained 
in alms) and offered a portion to the gods 
and gave away another portion to the 
Brahmanas. She gave a portion to that 
venerable lady and distributed the rest to 
those foremost of men ; she herself ate 
last of all. 

to. O king, they then all laid themselves 
down for sleep, Krishna lying like their 
nether pillow. The bed on which they lay 
was made of Kusha grass, on which they 
spread their deer-skins. 

it. They talked on various subjects in 
voices deep as those of black clouds.  And 
the conversations.of those heroes were such 
that neither Vaisyas, nor Sudras, nor 
Brahmanas could talk in that way. 

12. O king, there is no doubt that they 
are foremost of Kshatriyas, their conversa¬ 
tions being on all military subjects. Our hope 
has been fulfilled. We have heard that tne 
ions of Pritha escaped from the conflagra¬ 
tion. 

13. From the way in which the mark 
was shot down by the youth, the strength 
with which the bow was stringed by him and 
the manner in which they talked to one 
another, it is certain they are the sons of 
Pritha wandering in disguise. 

Vaishampayana said •— 

14. Thereupon the king Drupada be¬ 
came exceedingly pleased, and he sent to 
them his priest, directing him to ascertain 
who they were and whether they were (real¬ 
ly) the sons of the illustrious Pandu. 

15. As directed by the king, the priest 
went to them ; and applauding them all, he 
told them duty in detail all that he was 
commanded by the monarch to say. 

The Priest said 

16. O men that deserve first worship, 
the boon-giving king of the earth, the lord 
of Panchala, (Drupada) is desirous to know 
ho you are. Seeing this (hero) who has shot 
down the mark, his joy knows no bound. 

17. Giving us all particulars of your 
family and tribe, place your feet on the 
heads of your enemies and gladden the 
hearts of the Panchala king and his men, 
and of mine also. 


18. King Pandu was a dear friend of 
king Drupada who regarded him as Ids 
counter-self. He had all along cherished 
the desire of bestowing his this daughter 
on that Kuru prince (Pandu) as his 
daughter-in-law. 

19. O heroes of faultless features, it was 
the wish in the heart of the king Dru¬ 
pada that the long and strong armed Arjuna 
should marry in due religious form his this 
daughter. 

20. If that has become possible, nothing 
could be better, nothing more beneficial, 
and nothing more conducive to fame and 
virtue than that incident. 

Vaishampayana said 

Having said this, the priest became silent. 
The king (Yudhishthira) seeing him thus 
sitting with humility said, 

21. M Let water to wash his feet and the 
Arghya be offered to this Brahmana. He 
is king Drupada's priest, and therefore he 
is worthy of our respect. We should 
worship him with more than ordinary re¬ 
verence.’ 1 

22. O king, Bhima then did as directed. 
Accepting the worship thus offered to him. 
he (the priest) became exceedingly glad; 
and then Yudhishthira thus addressed that 
priest sitting in comfort. 

Yudhishthira said 

23—24. By fixing a special kind of dow¬ 
er the Panchala king, has given away his 
daughter according to the practice of his 
order. He has not done it freely. There¬ 
fore, he has nothing to say in regard to the 
race, tribe, family and character of him who 
has performed the feat. This hero has 
won the princess by satisfying the de¬ 
mand of the king Drupada. AH his 
queries have been answered by the string¬ 
ing df the bow and the shooting down the 
mark. 

25. It is by doing that which he had 
directed this illustrious hero has won 
Krishna in the assembly of kings. Under 
these circumstances, the king of the lunar 
race should not indulge in any regret which 
can only make him unhappy. 

26. The desire that the king Drupada 
has all alor£ entertained will (surely) be 
fulfilled, for O Brahmana, I believe this 
princess is endued with all auspicious marks. 

27. None that is weak in strength could 
string that bow, and none of low birth or 
unaccomplished in arms could have shot 
down the mark. 

28. It is, therefore, not proper for the 
Panchala king to grieve toaay lor his 



f ADI PARVA. 


267 


daughter. There is 'no man in the world 
who can (now) undo that act of shooting 
down the mark. 

Vauhampayana said. 

29. While Yudhishthira was saying all 
this, another messenger came in haste and 
said 14 The feast is ready.’ 

thus ends the hundred and ninety fifth 
chapter, the arrival of the priest , in the 
Vaivahika of the Adi Parva, 


Section CXCVI. 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA)— Continued. 

The Messenger said 

1. A good feast for the bridegroom’s 
party has been prepared by the king 
Orupada in view of his daughter’s nuptials. 
Come there after finishing your daily rites. 
The marriage of Krishna will take place 
there. Do not make any delay. 

2. These cars, adorned with golden 
lotuses and drawn by excellent horses, are 
worthy of being ridden by kings. Riding 
on them, come to the palace of the Panchala 
king. 

V aishampayana said 

3. Having sent away the priest and 
having placed Kunti and Krishna on one 
of these cars, those best of the Kurus 
ascended those excellent cars and proceeded 
towards the palace. 

4—5. O descendant of Bharata, O king, 
having heard from the priest the words of 
the Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira), he (Dru- 
pada), kept ready a large collection of 
things, such as fruits, sanctified garlands, 
armours, shields, carpets, kine, ropes, seeds, 
and various other articles and implements 
of agriculture so that he might ascertain to 
which order these heroes belonged. 

6. The king also collected every article 
appertaining to other arts and various 
implements and apparatus of every kind of 
sports. 

7—8. (He kept there also) shining 
armours, shields, excellent swords and sci¬ 
mitars, beautiful chariots and horses, first 
class bows and well-adorned arrows, various 
other kinds of weapons ornamented with 
gold, darts and rockets, battle-axes and 
other implements of war, beds and carpets, 
various other fine things and cloths of 
various kinds. 

9. Taking with her the virtuous Krishna, 
Kunti entered the inner appartment of 


Drupada's palace. The ladies (of the king 
Drupada’s household) worshipped the wife of 
the Kuru king with joyous hearts^ 

10—11. O king, seeing those foremost 
of men, each possessing the sportive gait 
of the lion, each with decr-sktn for his upper 

f arment, with eyes like mighty bulls, with 
road shoulders and long hanging arms 
which looked like the bodies of mighty 
snakes, the king, the king’s ministers, the 
king’s sons, the king’s relatives and atten¬ 
dants, all became exceedingly glad. 

12, Those heroes without any hesitation 
and awkwardness sat with perfect fearless¬ 
ness on costly seats furnished with foot¬ 
stools , and they sat one after the other 
according to the order of their age. 

13. After those heroes were seated, well- 
dressed male and female servants and 
skilful cooks brought excellent and costly 
viands, on plates made of gold and silver,— 
food worthy of kings alone. 

14. Then those foremost of men dined on 
those dishes and became well-pleased. 
After the dinner was over, those heroes 
among men,,passing over all other things, 
began to examine with interest the various 
implements of war (displayed there). 

15. Seeing this, Drupada’s sons and the 
king (Drupada) himself with all the chief 
councillors knew the sons of Kunti to be all 
of royal blood, and they therefore became 
exceedingly happy. 

thus ends the hundred and ninety sixth 
Section , the display of various things , in 
the Vaivahika of the Adi Parva . 


Section cxcvn. 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA)— continued, 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1—2. Then the greatly effulgent Pan¬ 
chala king addressed prince Yudhishthira in 
the form applicable to Brahmanas; he 
cheerfully enquired of that illustrious son of 
Kunti, (saying). “ Are we to know you as 
Kshatriyas or Brahmanas, 

3—4. Or accomplished Vaisyas or men 
born of Sudras ? Or are we to know you as 
celestials who have assumed the disguise of 
Brahmanas by their power of Maya (delu¬ 
sion) and who are roaming over the earth 
and who have come here for the hand of 
Krishna ? O Sir, tell us the truth, we are in 
great doubt. 

5. Shall we not be Inppy when our doubts 
will be removed ? O chastiser of foes, have 
the Fates been propitious to us ? 



263 


MAHABHARATA. 


6. Tell us the truth willingly. Truth 
becomes monarchs better than sacrifices and 
dedications of tanks. therefore, do not 
speak the untruth. 

7. O celestial-like hero, O chastiser of 
foes, hearing your reply, I shall then make 
arrangements for the marriage according 
to the order to which you belong. 

Yudhishthira said 

S. O Panchala king, be not cheerless. 
Be cheerful. There is no doubt, your desire 
has been fulfilled. 

9. O king, we are Kshatriyas, and we are 
the sons of the illustrious Pandu. Know me 
to be the eldest of the sons of Kunti and 
these two to be Bhima and Arjuna. 

to. O king, your daughter was won by 
these two (heroes) ip the assembly of kings. 
The twins (Naktrfa and Sahadeva) and 
Kunti are there where Krishna is. 

it. O best of men, let grief be dispelled 
from your heart, we are Kshatriyas. Your 
daughter like a lotus has been transplanted 
from one lake to the other. 

12. O great king, you are our revered 
superior and chief refuge. I have told alt 
that is necessary to be told. 

Vaishampayana said 

13. Thereupon the king Drupada had 
his eyes rolling in ecstasy and he was filled 
with delight; he could not for some time 
answer Yudhishthira. 

14. Suppressing his joy with great effort, 
that chastiser of foes (Drupada) replied to 
Yudhishthira in proper words. 

15. The virtuous-minded (king) asked 
how they (the Pandavas) had escaped from 
the city (of Vamavata). The Pandava 
(Yudhishthira) narrated it ail in detail. 

16. Hearing the narration of the son of 
Kunti, king Drupada censured that ruler of 
men, Dhritarashtra. 

17. The foremost of all eloquent men, 
Drupada, gave every assurance to the son 
of Kunti, Yudhishthira, and vowed to restore 
him to his kingdom. 

18. At the request of the king, Kunti 
Krishna, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins took 
up their quarters in a palate. 

19. O king, they continued to reside 
there, treated by Yagmasena (Drupada) 
with every respect. The king (Drupada) 
with his sons, assured by all that had 
happened, thus spoke (to Yudhishthira). 

Drupada said:— 

20. O mighty-armed hero, let the Kuru 
prince Arjuna take to-day the hand of my 


daughter with all due rites. To-day is an 
auspicious day. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

21. Thereupon the virtuous-minded king 
Yudhishthira replied, m O great king, I shall 
also have to marry. 

Drupada said 

22. O hero, take the hand of my daugh¬ 
ter you yourself in all due rites. " Or give 
Krishna in marriage to him ^hom you 
please. 

Yudhishthira said:— 

23. O king, Draupndt shall be the queen 
of all of us. O great king, it has been thus 
ordered by our mother. 

24. I am still unmarried,—so is the Pan- 
dava Bhimasena. Your jewel of a daughter 
has been won by Partha. 

25. O king, this is our rule that we must 
equally enjoy a jewel that we obtain. O 
excellent king, we are not willing now to 
break that rule. 

26. Krishna shall be the wedded queen 
of all of us. Let her take our hands before 
the fire one after the other according to our 
age. 

Drupada said 

27. O descendant of Kuru, it is ordained 
that a husband can have many wives, but 
we have never heard that a wife can have 
many husbands. 

28. O son of Kunti, pure as you are and 
acquainted with the rules of morality, you 
should not commit an act that is sinful and 
opposed both to the Vedas and usage. 
Why has your understanding come to be 
so? 

Tudliisthira said 

29. O great king, morality is subtle, 
we do not know its course. Let us there¬ 
fore follow the path trod by the illustrious 
men of former ages. 

30. My tongue never utters an untruth ; 
my mind never turns to that which is 
sinful. It has been commanded by our 
mother and my mind also approves of it. 

31. O king, it is certainly com form able 
to virtue. therefore, act accordingly without 
any scruple, O king, do not entertain any 
fear in this matter. 

Drupada said 

32. O son of Kunti, my son Dhrista- 
dyumna, Kunti, and you yourself, these throe 
settle amongst yourselves as to what should. 



ADI PARVA. 


269 


be done. I shall do what is proper to¬ 
morrow. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

33. O descendant of Bharata, O king, 
thereupon those three (Kunti, Yudhishthira 
and Dhristadyumna) discoursed on this 
matter; and at that very time Dwaipayaoa 
came there (wandering over the world) at 
pleasure. 

thus ends the hundred and ninety seventh 
Section , the’arrival of Dvoaipayana t in the 
Vaivahika of the Adi Parva . 


Section CXCVIU. 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Thereupon all the Pandavas, and the 
illustrious Panchala king, and alt others 
stood up; and they saluted the illustrious 
Krishna (Dwaipayana). 

2. The high-souled (Rishi) saluted them 
in return and enquired after their x wel¬ 
fare ; he then sat down on a holy carpet 
made of gold. 

3. Commanded by the immeasurably 
energetic Krishna (Dwaipayana), those 
foremost of men Ml sat down on costly seats. 

4. Thereupon a moment after the son 
of Prishata in sweet words asked that illus¬ 
trious man about the marriage of Draupadi. 

Drnpada said 

5. O illustrious one, how can one woman 
become the wife of many men without being 
defiled by sin. Tell me truly all this in 
detail. 

Vyasa said 

6. O king, this, being opposed to both 
usage and the Vedas, has become obsolete. 
I desire to hear what is the opinion of each 
of you in this matter. 

Drnpada said 

7. In my opinion this practice is sinful, 
because it is opposed to both the usage and 
the Vedas. O best of the twice born, there 
is nowhere a wife with many husbands. 

8. The illustrious men of former ages 
had never such an usage amongst them. 
The wise should never commit a sin. 

9. I can therefore never make up my 
mind to act in this way. The practice ap¬ 
pears to me to be of doubtful morality. 

10. O best of the twice born, O ascetic 
Rishi, O Brahmana, how can the elder 


brother, if he is at all of good character, can 
approach the wife of his younger brother ? 

it. The ways of morality are always 
subtle. therefore, we do not know them. 
We cannot, therefore, say what is comform- 
able to virtue and what is not. 

12. We cannot therefore perform such 
an act with a safe mind. O Brahmana, 

1 can never say, " Let Krishna be the wife 
of five (husbands). 

Yudhishthira said 

13. My tongue never utters an untruth, 
and my heart never turns to sin. When 
my heart approves it, it can never be sinful. 

14. I have heard in the Puranas that a 
lad> of the Gotama race named Jatila, the 
foremost of all virtuous women, married 
seven Rishis (all together.) 

15. So also the daughter of an ascetic 
married ten brothers, all of them bearing 
the same name of Prachetas, and all of 
their souls were exalted by asceticism. 

16. O foremost of all men learned in the 
precepts of virtue, it is said that obedience 
to superiors is a cardinal virtue. Of all 
superiors the mother is the foremost. 

17. She has commanded us, saying, 
“ Enjoy all of you that which you have 
obtained.” O best of the twice born, it is 
therefore I consider this act to be virtuous. 

Kunti said„ 

18. It is so as the virtuous Yudhishthira 
has said. I am in great fear lest my words 
become untrue. How shall 1 be saved from 
untruth ? 

Vyasa said:— 

19. O amiable one, you shall be saved 
from untruth. This is eternal virtue. O 
Panchala king, I will not talk on this matter 
before you all. You alone will hear it. 

20. (1 shall tell you) how this practice 
has been established, and why it is to be 
regarded as old and eternal. There is no 
doubt that what the son of Kunti, Yudhis- 

 thirn, has said is quite conformable to 
virtue. 

Vaishampayana said 

21. Thereupon rose the illustrious Vyasa, 
the lord Dwaipayana; and taking hold of 
Drupada’s hand he went into the palace. 

22. The Pandavas. Kunti, and the descen¬ 
dant of Prishata Dhristadyumm, waited in 
that place for those two (Vyasa and 
Drupada). 



MAHABHARATA. 


79 

23. Thereupon Dwaipayana explained 
to that illustrious king how the marriage 
of one wife with many husbands is confor¬ 
mable to virtue. 

thus ends the hundred and ninety eighth 
chapter, the words of Vyasa, in the 
Vaivahika of the Adi Parva • 


Section CXCIX. 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA)— Continued. 

Vyasa said 

1. In days of yore, the celestials per¬ 
formed a great sacrifice in the Naimisha 
forest. O king, the son of Vivaswata 
(Yama) became the slayer of animals. 

2. O king, thus employed in that 
sacrifice, Yama did not kill any human 
being. Thereupon the death being sus¬ 
pended among men, the number of human 
beings greatly increased. 

3. Soma, Sakra, Varuna, Kuvera, the 
Sadhyas, the Rudrus, the Vasus, the twin 
Ashwinis,—these and other celestials went to 
Prajapati, the creator of the/world. 

4. Alarmed at the increase of human 
beings, they all thus addressed the master 
of creation. “ We are afflicted„ with the 
fear (of the increase of human beings), 
and therefore wishing to be relieved, we ask 
your protection. 

The Grandsire said 

5. You have no fear from human beings; 
you are all immortal. You should not be 
frightened by the mortals. 

The Celestials said 

6. The mortals have all become the immor¬ 
tals. There is now no difference between 
them and us. Being vexed at this, we have 
come to you so that we may have some dis¬ 
tinction (from men). 

The Deity said 

7. The son of Vivaswata (Yama) is now 
engaged in the great sacrifice. It is for 
this reason that human beings are not dying. 
When his sacrificial works will be finished, 
the death will be again among men. 

8. When that time will come, the son of 
Vivaswata will be strengthened by your 
respective energies. He will then sweep 
away thousands of human beings who will 
have no energy left in them. 

Vyasa said:— 

9. Having heard these words of the first¬ 
born deity, the greatly strong (celestials) 


went (to the place of sacrifice), and when 
they all assembled there, they saw a (golden) 
lotus in the Bhagirathi. 

10. Seeing that (golden) lotus, they were 
very much surprised. The foremost of heroes 
among them, Indra, went (to find out where 
it grew). Going to the place whereform 
the Ganges always issues forth, he saw a 
lady as effulgent as the fire. 

11. The lady who had come there to 
fetch water was bathing in the Ganges, 
but she was weeping all the while. The 
drops of tear that fell from her eyes were 
transformed into golden lotuses. 

12. Seeing this wonderful sight, the 
wielder of the thunder (Indra) came to the 
lady and said, ‘0 amiable lady, who are 

ou ? Why are you weeping T I desire to 
now the truth. Tell me everything. 

The Lady said:— 

13. O Sakra, unfortunate as I am, you 
may know who I am, and why I am I weep¬ 
ing. O king, if you come with me as I lead 
the way, you can then see why I weep. 

Vyasa said:— 

14. He (Indra) followed her and 
soon saw a handsome youth with a young 
lady. They were seated on a throne on the 
peaks of the king of mountains, and they 
were playing with dice. 

15. The king of the celestials thus spoke 
to him, “O intelligent youth, know this 
universe to be under my sway.” Seeing 
that the person take no notice of what he 
had said, he (Indra) again said, ”1 am the 
lord of the universe.” 

16. Seeing Indra angry, the youth who 
was none else than Mahadeva cast a glance 
at him and smiled. At that glance the king 
of the celestials was at once paralysed, and, 
stood on that spot like a statue. 

17. When the game of dice came to an 
end, he (Siva) spoke thus to the weeping 
woman, 11 Bring him (Indra) here. I shall so 
deal with him that pride may not again 
enter his heart.” 

18. As soon as Indra was touched by 
that woman, the chief of the celestials with 
limbs paralysed by that touch fell down on 
the ground. The illustrious deity of fierce 
energy (Siva) then said to him, 0 Indra, 
never act thus again. 

19. Remove this huge stone, for your 
strength and energy are immeasurable. 
Enter the hole and wait with others who are 
alt like you and the sun in splendour.” 

20. He (Indra) removed that stone and 
sa w a cave on the great mountain in which 



AD! PARVA. 


271 


were four others resembling himself. Seeing 
them, he became very much grieved ana 
exclaimed, 41 Shall 1 too meet with such 
fate?” 

21. Then looking at the wielder of 
thunder (Indra) with expanded eyes, the 
deity Girisha (Siva,) said in anger, “O 
Satakratu, (Indra) enter this cave without 
delay, for out of folly you have insulted me 
before my very eyes. ' 

22. thus addressed by the lord (Siva,) 
the chief of the celestials was deeply grieved 
in consequence of that imprecation ; and with 
limbs weakened by fear he trembled like 
the wind-shaken leaf of the fig tree on the 
breast of the king of mountains. 

23. thus unexpectedly cursed by the 
deity that rides the bull (Siva r ) Indra trem¬ 
bled from head to foot; and with joined 
hands he thus addressed the fearful god of 
many manifestations, <# 0 Bhava, you are 
the on-looker of the infinite universe. ” 

24. To him thus replied the deity of 
fiery energy with smiles, “Those that nave 
your disposition never obtain my grace. 
These others (four in the cave) were like 
you at one time. therefore, enter the cave 
and lie there for some time. 

25—26. The fate of you all should cer¬ 
tainly be the same. All of you shall have to 
take births in the world of men, where 
having achieved many difficult feats and 
killing large number of men, you shall again 
regain the valued region of Indra by 
the merits of your respective deeds. You 
shall accomplish all 1 have said and much 
more. 

The old Indras said 

27. We shall go from our celestial region 
to the region of men where salvation is diffi¬ 
cult to gain. But let the celestials, Dharma, 
Vayu, Magavata (present Indra) and the 
twin Ashwinis beget us on our would-be 
mother. After fighting with men with both 
human and celestial weapons, we shall 
again come back to the region of Indra. 

Vyasa said.— 

28. Having heard this, the wielder of 
thunder (Indra) again addressed that fore¬ 
most of gods (Siva) saying, 14 Instead of 
going myself, I shall create from myself 
with a portion of my energy a person able 
to accomplish the task; and he will be the 
fifth among these (old Indras).” 

29. Btshwavuka, Bhutadhamana, great¬ 
ly effulgent Sivi, Sauti and Tejaswin,— 
these are the five Indras of old. 

30. The illustrious deity of the formid¬ 
able bow kindly granted to the five Indras 


the desire they cherished in their hearts, and 
he appointed that exceedingly beautiful 
lady, who was none else than the celestial 
Laicshmi herself to be their common wife 
in the world of men. 

31. Thereupon accompanied by all these 
Indras, he (Siva) went to Narayana, who 
is immeasurably effulgent, infinite, im¬ 
material, the seif-born, the old, the eternal 
and the spirit of the infinite universe. 

32. He (Narayana) approved of eveiy- 
thing, and then they (Indras) all took births 
in the world of men. Hari (Narayana) took 
up two hairs from his body; one of them was 
white and the other black. 

33. Those two hairs entered the wombs 
of the two ladies of the Yadu race,—named 
Devaki and Rohini. The hair of the deity 
that was white became Valadeva, and the 
hair that was black became Reshava's 
self,—Krishna. 

34. Those Indra-Iike ones who were 
kept confined in the cave of the mountain 
are none else than the five sons of Pandu, 
possessing great prowess. And the Pan- 
dava Savyasachi (Arjuna) is a portion of 
(the present) Indra. 

35. O king, thus were born as the sons 
of Pandu those that were at one time Indras, 
and the celestial Lakshmi herself who had 
appointed to be their wife is the exceedingly 
beautiful Draupadi. 

36. How could she whose effulgence is 
like that of the sun or the moon, whose 
fragrance spreads over two miles around, 
take birth in any other but an extraordinary 
way ? She rose from within the earth by 
virtue of your sacrifice. 

37. O king, I cheerfully grant to you this 
boon,—I give you spiritual sight. Behold 
the sons of Kunti now possessing their 
sacred and celestial forms of old. 

V&ishampay&na said 

38. Thereupon, that holy Brahmana, 
Yyasaof greatly generous deeds, gave celes¬ 
tial sight to that king (Drupada) by his 
ascetic power. Then the king saw them (the 
Pandavas) all possessing their former forms. 

39. He saw them with celestial bodies, 
with golden crowns and celestial garlands, 
each of them resembling like a Indra himself, 
with complexion as effulgent as the fire or 
the sun, each adorned with every ornament, 
each handsome and youthful, each with 
broad chest and stature with a height of 
five cubits. 

40. Possessing every accomplishment, 
attired in celestial robes of great beauty, and 
adorned with fragrant garlands of excellent 



MAHABHARATA. 


272 


make, the king saw them as so many three¬ 
eyed gods (Siva) or Vasus, Rudras or 
Adityas. 

41. Seeing the (four others) Pandavas in 
the forms of the old Indras, and Arjuna in 
the form of the present) lndra sprang 
from lndra himself, the king Drupada was 
exceedingly pleased. He was greatly surpris¬ 
ed on seeing the celestial manifestation of 
Maj/a. 

42. Looking at his daughter, that fore¬ 
most of women possessing great beauty as 
that of a celestial maiden and splendour as 
that of the fire or the moon, the king con¬ 
sidered, that for her beauty, splendour and 
fame, she is really worthy to be the wife of 
those celestial beings. 

43. Seeing that wonderful sight, he 
touched the feet of the son of Satyavati, 
(Vyasa) and said, “ O great Rishi, there is 
nothing wonderful in you." 

Vyasa said 

44. There was in a certain wood a 
daughter of an illustrious Rishi, who though 
handsome and chaste, did not get a hus¬ 
band, 

45. She gratified by her asceticism the 
deity Sankara (Siva). The deity being plea¬ 
sed with her, himself thus spoke to her 
“Tell me what you want.' 

46. Having been thus addressed, she 
repeatedly said to the boon-giving supreme 
lord, “I desire to have a husband endued 
with all accomplishments.” 

47. That deity Sankara gave her the 
boon in joyful heart (saying,) “ O amiable 
girl, you shall have five husbands." 

48. She who had been able to please 
the diety said again, “ O Sankara, l desire 
to have from you only one husband endued 
with all accomplishments. ” 

49. The god of gods, being well-pleased 
with her, spoke again to her thus, “You 
have addressed me five times saying, “ Give 
me a husband” 

50. O. amiable girl, therefore it shall be 
as you have asked. Be blessed.. All this 
will happen in one of your future births. ” 

51. This your daughter of celestial beauty 
is that maiden. The faultless Krishna of the 
Prishata race had been pre-ordained to be 
the wife of five (men). 

52. The celestial Lakshmi has risen 
in the great sacrifice to be the wife of the 
Pandavas. After severe penances she is 
born as your daughter. 

53. O king, that handsome goddess, who 
is waited upon by all the celestials, becomes 
the wife of five husbands. She has been 


created by the self-created (Brahma) for 
this purpose. Hearing all this, do what you 
desire.' 

thus ends the hundred and ninety ninth 
chapter, the history of fiite Indras, in the 
Vaivahika of the Adi Parva . 


Section CC. 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA)— Continued, 

Drupada said— 

1. O great Rishi, it is only when f have 
not heard from you all this that I intended 
to act in the way I have already told you. 

I am now incapable of acting against vrhat 
has been ordained by the celestials. I there¬ 
fore desire to act as you have said. 

2. The knot of destiny cannot be untied. 
There is nothing which is the result of our 
own actions. That which was made to secure 
one husband (for my daughter) becomes now 
the source of this (new) ordinance. 

3. As Krishna (Draupadi) had repeated¬ 
ly asked (in her former life) for five times • 
saying, “Give me a husband,” the great 
deity had granted her the boon accordingly. 
The deity himself knows the right or the 
wrong of this. 

4 When Sankara has fixed this ordi¬ 
nance,—sinful or virtuous, I can have no 
fault. therefore, let these (heroes) take as 
ordained the hand of Krishna according to 
all due rites. 

Vaishampayana said 

5. The illustrious Rishi then spoke thus 
to Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira.) “ O son of 
Pandu to-day is an auspicious day. To-day 
the Moon has entered the constellation 
Pushy a. You first take the hand of Krishna 
to-day.” 

6. Thereupon the king Jagmasena with 
his son made preparations for the marriage. 
Keeping ready many costly marriage pre¬ 
sents, he brought out his daughter Krishna 
adorned after a bath, with many jewels and 
pearls. 

7. All the freinds and the relatives of the 
king with the state ministers and many 
Brahmanas and citizens according to their 
precedence of ranks, came there ho joy 
to witness the marriage ceremony. 

8. Adorned with that concourse of chief 
men, with its court-yards decked with 
lotuses and lilies and beautified with the lines 
of troops, and fastened round with diamonds 
and precious stones, his (Drupada’s) palace 
looked like the sky studded with the brilli- 
ant stars. 



ADI PARVA. 




t). Then those Kuru Princes, those young 
(heroes) bathed; adorned with ear-rings, 
attired in costly robes, ;t id perfumed by 
sandal paste, they performed the Aviseka 
(preparatory ceremony) and all other usual 
auspicious rites. 

io. O lord, like mighty bulls entering 
their pen, they then accompanied by their 
priest Dhaumya, as effulgent as fire, en¬ 
tered in joy and in due order (the wedding 
place) one after the other. 

it. Then that Veda-knowing priest 
(Dhaumya) kindled the sacred fire and 
poured the libations of Ghee in that blazing 
fare with proper Mantras . That Mantra - 
knowing Brahmana then called Yudhishthira 
and united him with Krishna (Draupadi). 

12. Walking round the fire (for seven 
times), the bride and the bridegroom took 
each other’s hands. thus they were married 
by the Veda-knowing (Dhaumya). Then 
taking leave of that ornament of battle 
(Yudhishthira), he (Dhaumya) went out of 
the palace. 

13. Then those mighty car-warriors, 
the perpetuators of the Kuru race, those 
princes, attired in costly robes, took the hand 
of i 4.it best of women (Draupadi) day by 
da^ m succession. 

14. The celestial Rishi told me of a very 
wonderful incident, namely that the high- 
souled lady of slender waist (Draupadi) 
regained her virginity day after day (i.e. 
every day after her previous marriage). 

15. After the wedding was over, Drupada 
gave to those great car-warriors various 
kinds of excellent wealth. (He gave them) 
one hundred chariots with golden standards, 
each drawn by four horses with golden 
bridles , 

16. One hundred elephants all possess¬ 
ing auspicious marks on their temples and 
faces, and all looking like so many mountains 
with golden peaks ; and one hundred young 
maid-servants attired in costly robes and 
adorned with ornaments and floral wreaths 

17. Making fire his witness, the high 
souled king of the lunar race, (Drupada), 

S ave separately each of those celestial dike 
eroes much wealth, various brilliant orna¬ 
ments and many costly robes. 

\ 8 . When the wedding was over, and after 
they had obtained that maiden, like L&kshmi 
herself, along with great wealth, those greatly 
powerful sons of Pandu like so many indras 
passed their days in joy, in the capital of the 
Panchala king. 

thus ends the tvto hundredth Section , the 
Marriage of Draupadi , in the Vaivahika of 
the Adi Parva» 


Section CCI. 

(VAIVAHIKA PARVA)— ContJ. 

V ai shampayana Said 

I After his alliance with the PandnVaS, 
Drupada had all his fears dispelled ; and he 
did not fear even the celestials. 

2. The ladies of the illustrious Drupada’s 
(household) all came to Kunti; and mention¬ 
ing their respective names, they saluted hef 
with their heads touching the ground. 

3. Krishna, attired in red silk and with 
her wrists still encircled with ailspicious 
thread, saluted her mother-in-law with 
reverence; and she theif stood before her 
contentedly with joined hands. 

4. Out of affection Pritha (Kunti) pro¬ 
nounced a blessing on Draupadi, endued 
withjbeauty and auspicious marks, ftnd with 
sweet disposition and good character. 

Knnti said:— 

5. As Sachi is to tndra, as Saha to 
Vivavasu, as Rohini to Soma, as Danlayanti 
to Nala, 

6. As Vadra to Vaisravarta, as Arun- 
dhauti to Vashistha and as Lakshmi to 
Narayana, so be you to yoilr husbands. 

7. O amiable girl, be the mother of long- 
lived and heroic children, and possess every 
thing that can make you happy. Be lucky 
and prosperous, be faithful to your husbands 
and a performer of great sacrifices. 

8. Let your time be ever passed in duly 
entertaining your guests, the strangers that 
come to your house, the pious men, the old 
men, the children and the superiors. 

9. Be installed with the virtueloving 
king (Yudhishthira) as the queen of the king¬ 
dom and the cap ital of Kurujangala. 

to. Let the whole earth, conquered by 
your greatly powerful husbands, be given to 
the Brahmanas in ,a great Ashwamedha 
sacrifice 

ti O accomplished girl what gems of 
great qualities are in the world let them 
all belong to you. O blessed girl, be happy 
for (full) one hundred years. 

t2. O daughter-in-law, as I rejoice to 
day on seeing you in red silk, so 1 shall 
rejoice when you will give birth to an accom¬ 
plished son. 

VaisluuHpayatta tfaul 

13. After the Pandavas had beert mar¬ 
ried, Hari (Krishna) sent to them various 
golden ornaments set with pearls and Vui m 
durya gems 


35 



274 


mahabiiarata. 


14. Madhava (Krishna) also sent (to 
them) costly robes of various countries, 
many beautiful and soft blankets and skins, 

15. Various co3tlv beds, carpets and 
conveyances,and hundreds of vessels set with 
diamonds and Vaidurya gems. 

16. Krishna gave them thousands of 
maid-servants, all young, beautiful, and ac¬ 
complished, and adorned with all ornaments 
and brought from various countries. 

17. He also gave them many well-train¬ 
ed elephants of me country ot the Madras, 
many excellent horses adorned with orna¬ 
ments, and many chariots drawn by horses 
of excellent colors and large teeth. 

18. Madhusudana (Krishna) of immea¬ 
surable soul sent to them also in separate 
heaps millions of coins of pure gold. 

19. Wishing to please Govinda (Krish¬ 
na), Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, being himself 
filled with great joy, accepted Si those 
presents. 

thus ends the two hundred and first 
Section , the presents of Sreekrishna, in the 
Vaivahika of the Adi Parva, 


Section CCII. 

(VIDURAGAMANA PARVA). 

Vaishwnpayana said 

1. Thereupon the kings knew from their 
trusted spies that the beautiful Draupadi 
had got the Pandavas as her husbands ; 

2. The illustrious man who had bent the 
bow and shot the mark was Arjuna, that 
foremost of all victorious warriors and the 
great wielder of bow and arrows; 

3. The greatly strong 1 man who had 
hurled away the Madra king Shalya, he who 
had in anger frightened all men in the battle 
by the tree, 

4. He who had stood in perfect fearless¬ 
ness, whose touch was deatn to all, that 
illustrious hero, was no other than Bhima, 
that grinder of hostile ranks. 

5. The monarchs were very much ash- 
tonished to learn that the sons of Kunti, the 
Pandavas, had assumed the guise of the 
peaceful Brahmanas. 

6. They heard that Kunti with her sons 
had been formerly burnt to death in the lac- 
house ; therefore those kings regarded the 
Pandavas as men who had come back from 
the dead. 

7. Remembering the greatly cruel deads 
of Purochana, they said, “Fie on Bhishma! 
Fie on Dhritarashtraof the Kuru race !" 


8. When the Saimvara was over, at) the 
kings, learning that Draupadi had been 
wedded to the randavas, went away to their 
respective kingdoms. 

9—10. Having heard that Draupadi had 
been married to tne rider of the white horse 
(Arjuna), Duryodhana became greatly de¬ 
pressed ; and accompanied by his brothers, 
Ashwathama, his maternal uncle (Shakuni), 
Karna and Kripa, he started for his capital. 
Then Dushashana, being full of shame, 
thus slowly spoke to him. 

11. “O king, if Arjuna had not dis¬ 
guised himself as a Brahmana, he could 
have never succeeded in obtaining Drau¬ 
padi. On that account, none could recognise 
as Dhananjaya. 

12. 1 believe that Destiny is supreme 
and human exertion is useless. O brother, 
fie on our exertions, when the Pandavas 
are still alive!” 

13. thus talking to one another and 
blaming Purochana, they entered Hastina- 
pur in misery and sorrow. 

14—15. Seeing the greatly powerful sons 
of Pritha escaped from the house of lac 
and allied with Drupada, and thinking of 
Dhristadyumna, Shikhandin and also other 
sons of Drupada who were all learned in 
every art of war, he (Duryodhana) became 
depressed and alarmed. 

16—17. Having learnt that Draupadi 
had been won by tne Pandavas and that the 
sons of Dhritarashtra,—their pride being 
broken,—had returned in shame, Vidura 
became exceedingly glad ; and coming to 
Dhritarashtra, O king, Khattwa (Vidura) said 
to him, “The Kurus are prospering from 
good luck." 

18. O descendant of Bharata, the son of 
Vichitravirya, the king Dhritarashtra, becom¬ 
ing astonished, said in great joy, “What 
good luck! What good luck !" 

19. That king, possessing the eye of 
knowledge, thought from ignorance that his 
eldest son Duryodhana had been chosen by 
the daughter of Drupada. 

20. He ordered various ornaments to be 
made for Draupadi,and he ordered that both 
Krishna and his son Duryodhana should be 
(brought in great pomp.) 

21. It was then that Vidura said that 
Draupadi had chosen the Pandavas for her 
husbands, and they were all in good health 
and peace, and those heroes had been duly 
received by Drupada; 

22. And that the Pandavas had been allied 
with the many relatives and friends of Dru¬ 
pada, each possessing large armies, and also 
with many othet^ that had come to the 
Saimvara 



ADI PARVA. 


275 


Dforitarastfa said 

23. Those children are dearer to me than 
they were to Pandu. Know that my affection 
for them is now greater than before. 

4. Those heroes, the sons of Pandu, are 
in good health and peace and they have now 
friends. Their friends and others (with 
whom they have allied) are all greatly 
powerful. 

25. O Khattwa, who among kings does 
not desire to have Drupada with his relatives 
as his friend in weal or in woe ? 

Vaishampayana said:— 

26. When he said this, Vidura replied, 
•0 king, let your understanding remain so 
for one hundred years.” 

27. O king, then there came to Dhrita- 
rastra Duryodhana and the son of Radha 
(Karna), and they thus spoke to him, 

28. u We are incapable of speaking 
wicked designs before Vidura. We have 
now found you alone; we shall, therefore, 
speak to you all that we desire to say. 

29. O father, are you considering the 
prosperity of the enemy as your own ? O 
best of men, you were applauding the 
Pandavas before Khattwa. 

30. O sinless one, you are not acting as 
you should. You ought to act every day in 
a way as to weaken their (the Pandavas) 
strength. 

31. The time has come when we should 
consult together, so that they (the Panda-) 
vas) may not swallow us all with our sons, 
forces, friends and relatives. 

thus ends the two hundred and second 
Section , the teords of Duryodhana , in the 
Viduragamana in the Adi Parva, 


Section CCIII. 

(VIDURAGAMANA PARYA)— Contd. 

Dhritaraatra said 

1. I desire to act exactly as you desire, 
but I do not wish to show my mental thoughts 
to Vidura even by my demeanour, 

2. therefore, I was highly applauding 
them (the Pandavas), so that Vidura may 
not know my real desire even by a sign. 

3. O Duryodhana, as this is the (proper) 
time, tell me, therefore, what is in your 
mind and also in the mind of the sen of 
Radha (Karna.) 


Duryodhana said 

4. Let us by the help of trusted and 
skilful Brahmanas privately create dissen¬ 
sions amongst the Pandavas,—a quarrel 
between the sons of Kunti and those of 
Madri. 

5—7 Or let the king Drupada with his 
sons and all his ministers of state be tempt¬ 
ed by the presents of large wealth, so that 
they may abandon the cause of the son of 
Kunti, Yudhishthira. Or let them (our spies) 
speak to each of them separately the inconvi- 
niencesof this place (Hastinapur) and induce 
them to live there (in Panchala.) thus 
separated from the Kurus, they may live 
permanently there. 

8. O let some clever men, full of resources, 
sow the seed of disunion among the sons of 
Prithaand make them jealous of one an¬ 
other. 

9. Or let them incite Krishna (Draupadi) 
against her husbands; as she has many hus¬ 
bands, it will not at all be difficult. Let some 
make the Pandavas dissatisfied with her, so 
that she may be displeased with them. 

10. O king, let some clever spies, full of 
resources, go there and secretly bring about 
the death of Bhimasena,—he is the strong¬ 
est of them all. 

11. Relying on him the son of Kunti 
formerly disregarded us. He is fierce, brave 
and the main-stay of the Pandavas. 

12. O king, on his death all the others 
(the Pandavas) will be deprived of strength 
and energy. Deprived of him, who is their 
main-stay, they will not attempt to regain 
their kingdom. 

13. If Arjuna is supported from behind 
by Vrikodara (Bhima), he is invincible in 
battle. But if Bhima is not there, he 
(Arjuna) is not a match for even the fourth 
part of the son of Radha (Karna). 

14 In conseauence of the death of 
Bhimasena, they (the Pandavas) would know 
i themselves weak and ourselves strong; and 
they will not attempt to recover the king¬ 
dom. 

15. O king, if coming here, they prove 
themselves docile and obedient to us, we 
would then try to repress them according to 
the Shastras (Political science). 

16. We may tempt them with handsome 
girls; and on seeing which Krishna (Drau¬ 
padi) will surely be annoyed with the sons 
of Kunti. 

17 Or, O son of Radha, send messengers 
to bring them here, so that getting them 
here, we might kill them by some means or 
other. 


18. O father, employ any of these means 
which appear to you faultless. Time passes 
away, we should not make any further de¬ 
lay. 

19. So long their confidence in that best 
of kings Drupada is not established, we 
may succeed,—but not after, (when it has 
been established.) 

20. O father, these are my views for their 
suppression. Judge whether they are good 
or bad. What, O son of Radha (Karna), do 
you think ? 

thus ends the two hundred and third 
chadter, the words of Duryodhana t in the 
Viduragamana in the Adi Parva . 


Section CCIV. 

(VIDURAGAMANA PARVA)— Contd, 

Kama said:— 

1. O Duryodhana, in my opinion your 
reasonings are not well-founded. O perpetuator of the Kuru race,
—no machinations 
will succeed against the Pandavas. 

2. O hero, you have formerly tried to 
accomplish your wishes by various subtle 
means, but you have not been successful in 
killing them. 

3. O king, they were then living near 
you, they were then mere children, they 
were then without allies and friends, still 
you could not injure them. 

4. They are now living at a distance, 
they are now grown up, and they are now 
stronger by securing allies. It is my firm 
belief that you will not be able to injure them 
now with any subtle machinations. 

5. They are aided by Fate. When thev 
are desirous of regaining the place of their 
fathers and grandfathers, we can never 
succeed to injure them by any means of 
ours. 

6. It is impossible to create disunion 
amongst them. They can never be disunit¬ 
ed who have taken a common wife. 

7. We can never succeed in estranging 
Krishna (Draupadi) from them by any spies. 
She chose them as her husband when they were 
in adversity,—they are now in prosperity. 

8. Women generally desire to have many 
husbands, Krishna has got it; she can never 
be estranged from them. 

9. The Panchala king is honest and 
virtuous, he is not covetuous for wealth. 
Even if we offer him our whole kingdom, 
he will certainly not abandon the sons of 
Kunti. 


I 10. His son is also well-accomplished 
and has become attached to the Pandavas; 
therefore, I think by no subtle machinations 
that are in your power, you will be able to 
injure them. 

11. O best of men, this is what is good 
and advisable for us to day,—namely, O 
king, to attack and smite them till the 
Pandavas are exterminated. O sire, con¬ 
sent to this. 

12. As long as our party is strong and 
that of the Panchalas weak, so long let us 
strike them without scruple. 

13. O son of Gandhari, O king, as long 
as their innumerable conveyances, their 
friends and relatives, do not gather together, 
so long continue to display your prowess. 

14. O king, as long as the Panchala 

king with his greatly powerful son does not 
resolve to fight with us, so long display your 
prowess. ^ 

15. As long as Vasudeva, Krishna, does 
not march with the Yadava hosts into the 
city of the Panchala king in order to restore 
the Pandavas to their kingdom, so long 
display your prowess. 

16. Wealth, articles of enjoyments, king¬ 
dom,—nay there is nothing which Krishna 
may not sacrifice for the Pandavas. 

17. The whole earth was acquired by the 
illustrious Bharata by his prow’ess. Indra 
has obtained the sovereignty of three worlds 
by prowess alone. 

18. O king, prowess is always admired 
in a Kshatriya. O best of kings, prowess 
is the cardinal virtue of the heroes. 

19. O king, therefore, without any further 
delay let us with our large army of four 
kinds of troops vanquish Drupada and bring 
here the Pandavas. 

20. The Pandavas cannot be defeated 
by any policy of conciliation, of gift, of 
wealth, of bribery or of disunion. therefore, 
vanquish them by your prowess. 

21. O king, after defeating them by 
youi prowess, rule over the wide world. I 
do not see any other rpeans of booming suc¬ 
cessful in our object. 

Vaishampayana said 

22. Hearing what the son of Radha 
(Karna) said, the powerful Dhritarashtra 
gave him high praise, and he then spoke to 
him thus, 

23. " O son of Suta, you are gifted with 
great wisdom and you are highly accom¬ 
plished in arms. Such words breathing (he 
spirit of heroism are surely worthy of you 



ADI PARVA. 


277 


24. But let Bhishma, Drona, and Vidura 
and also you two, consult together, and then 
adopt that means which may lead to our 
good.” 

25. Thereupon, the greatly illustrious 
king Dhritarashtra summoned to him all 
those councillors and consulted with them. 

thus ends the two hundred and fourth 
Section , the consultation of Dhritarashtra , 
in the Viduragamana of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCV. 
(VIDURAGAMANA PARVA)— Contd. 

Bhishma said 

1. O Dhritarashtra, I can never consent 
to a quarrel with the sons of Pandu. There 
is no doubt Pandu was to me as you are to 
me. 

2. The sons of Gandhari are (as dear) 
to me as the sons of Kunti. O Dhritarashtra, 
they are to be protected as much by me as 
you. 

3. O king, they are as much dear to me 
as prince Duryodnana^and other Kurus. 

4. therefore, 1 can never like a quarrel 
with them. Conclude a treaty with those 
heroes and give them the half of the king¬ 
dom. There is no doubt that this is the 
ancestral kingdom of those best of the Kurus 
(the Pandavas). 

5. O Duryodhana, as you consider this 
kingdom as your paternal property, so do 
the Pandavas consider this their paternal 
property. 

6. If the illustrious sons of Pandu do not 
get the kingdom,—how can it be yours or of 
any descendant of the Bharata race ? 

7. O best of the Bharata race, if you 
think you have rightfully come into the 
possession of the kingdom, I think, they 
can consider also that they have rightfully 
come to the possession of the kingdom before 
you. 

8. Give them in peace the half of the 
kingdom. O best of men, this is for the 
good of all. 

9. If you act otherwise, no good will 
come to any of us. There is no doubt we all 
will be covered with dishonour. 

10. Try to maintain your good name. A 
good name is the source of one’s strength. It 
is said that a man, whose reputation is gone, 
lives in vain. 

11. O descendant of Kuru, O son of 
Gandhari, a man does not die so long his re¬ 


putation exists. One lives as long as his fame 
lasts; he dies when his reputation is gone. 

12. therefore, follow the practice that is 
worthy of the Kuru race. O mighty-armed 
hero, act as your forefathers did before you. 

13. It is fortunate for us that the sons of 
Pirtha are alive; it is fortunate that Pritha 
is still alive. It is fortunate that the sinful 
Purochana, without being successful (in his 
evil design), himself perished. 

14. O son of Gandhari, from that time 
when I heard that the sons of Kunti Bhoja’s 
daughter had been burnt to death, I could 
not meet with any living creatures. 

15. O best of men, hearing the way in 
which Kunti was killed, men do not consider 
Purochana so much guilty as they consider 
you. 

16. O king, therefore the escape of the 
sons of Pandu from that conflagration and 
their present reappearance remove your bad 
repute. 

17. O descendant of Kuru, know that as 
long as those heroes (the Pandavas) live, the 
wielder of thunder (Indra) himself cannot 
deprive them of their paternal property. 

18. They are virtuous and united ; they 
are unjustly kept out of their equal share in 
the kingdom. 

19. If you want to act justly, if you want 
to act what is pleasing to me, if you want to 
seek the welfare of all,—then give them the 
half of the kingdom. 

thus ends the two hundred and fifth 
chapter, the words of Bhishma, in the Vidu- 
ragamana of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCVI. 
(VIDURAGAMANA PARVA).— Contd. 

Drona said 

1. O king Dhritarashtra, it has been, 
heard that friends summoned for consulta¬ 
tion should always speak what is right, true 
and conducive of fame. 

2. O Sire, my opinion is as that of the 
illustrious Bhishma. Let the sons of Kunti 
have a share in the kingdom. It is eternal- 
virtue. 

3. O descendant of Bharata, send a sweet 
speeched man to Drupada; let him carry 
for them (the Pandavas) a large treasure 
with him. 

4. Let him take costly presents with him 
for both the bridegroom and the bride, and 
let him speak to him (Drupada) the increase 
of your power and dignity that has been 
secured by this alliance. 



MAHABHARATA. 


af® 

5.  O king, let him say to Drupada and 
Dhristadyumna that both you and Duryo- 
dhana have become exceedingly glad by 
all that has happened. 

6. Let him say that the alliance has been 
exceedingly proper, and it has become very 
pleasing to you, and that you are quite 
worthy of it. Let him repeatedly propitiate 
the sons of Kunti and the two sons of Madri. 

7. O king, let many brilliant golden 
ornaments at your command be given to 
Draupadi. 

8. O best of the Bharata race, let proper 
presents be given to all the sons of Drupada, 
and all the Pandavas with (their mother) 
Kunti. 

9. thus propitiating Drupada with the 
Pandavas, he should then propose their re¬ 
turn (to Hastinapur.) 

to. When those heroes will get the 
permission (of Drupada) to come here, let 
Dushyas&na and Vikarna go with a magni- 
ficient army to receive the Pandavas. 

11. Let those best of the Kurus, the sons 
of Pandu, always be treated by you with 
affection, and let them be installed in their 
paternal kingdom as desired by the people. 

12. O descendant of Bharata, in my 
opinion and that of Bhishma, this should be 
vour conduct towards the Pandavas, who 
stand to you in the relation of your own 
sons. 

Karna said:— 

13. These two (Bhishma and Drona) are 
supported by your wealth and favours. 
They are supposed to be your best friends. 
What can be more surprising than they 
should give you advice that is not for your 
good ! 

14. How can the wise accept the advice 
which is pronounced good by the man who 
speaks witn wicked intention, taking care to 
conceal the wickedness of his heart ? 

15. Friends can neither do good nor 
harm in distress. Man’s happiness or 
misery depends on Destiny alone. 

16. He who is wise, or he who is a fool, 
he who Is old or he who is a child, he who 
has friends or he who has no friends, be¬ 
comes happy or unhappy everywhere. 

17. We have heard that there was a 
king of old, named Ambuvachi, who was the 
king a t Rajgriha over the Maghadas. 

18. He was a king who never looked to 
his affairs. A 11 he did was to inhale and 
exhale the air. All his affairs were in the 
hands of his ministers. 


19. He had a minister, named Maha- 
sarni, who became the supreme lord of his 
kingdom. Regarding that all authority had 
been gained, he even disregarded the king. 

20. The fool himself appropriated every¬ 
thing belonging to the King, including his 
artides of luxury, his women, his jewels and 
his^ sovereignty. 

%I. Having secured them all, that avari¬ 
cious man’s avarice only increased ; and 
having appropriated all, he coveted his 
kingdom. 

22. We have heard that with all his 
endeavours he did not succeed to get tlie 
kingdom, although the king did not look to 
his affairs and only breat bed the air. 

23. O king, what else human exertion 
can be said to have been in him than Chat 
the kingdom was dependent on his Destkfcy. 
If this kingdom be fixed in you by destiny, 

24. It will certainly remain in you, not¬ 
withstanding the enmity of all the worlds. 
If otherwise, however you may try, it will 
never remain in you. 

25. You are learned,—therefore, remem 
bering all this, judge of the honesty and 
dishonesty of your ministers. Ascertain 
also who amongst them are wicked and 
who have spoken wisely and well. 

Drona said 

26. Wicked as you are, you say so 
out of the wickedness of your intentions. 
It is to injure the Pandavas, you find fault 
with us. 

27 . O Karna, know that what I have 
said is good for all. This is for the pros¬ 
perity of the Kuru race. If you consider it 
as productive of evil, tell yourself what is 
the great good. 

28. If the advice, productive of great 
good that I have given, is not followed, my 
opinion is that tne Kurus will be exter¬ 
minated. 

thus ends the two hundred and sixth 
Section , the words of Drona, in the Vidura - 
gamana of the Adi Parva. 


Section CC V IL 

VIDURAGAMANA PARVA— (Contdif 

Vidura said 

i. O king, there is no doubt your friends 
have spoken to you whatj is good for you. 
But as you don’t listen to their words, they 
find no place here. 

2. O kin?, the best of Kurus, the son 
of Shantanu (Bhishma) has said what is for 
your great good, but you do not accept it 
(his advice.) 

3. What has been said by Drona is 
for your good, but the son of Radha, Karna, 
does not consider it for your good. 

4. O king, after (due^ reflection I do 
not find there is any who is a better friend 
of yours than these two best of men (Bhishma 
and Drona) or who excells them in wisdom. 

5. These two are old in age, in wisdom, 
and in shastras. O king, they look at the sons 
of Pandu with equal eyes. 

6. O descendant of the Bharata, O king, 
they are not certainly inferior to Rama, the 
son of Dasharatha and Gaya in the virtue 
and truthfulness. 

7—8. It is not seen that they have ever 
given you evil advice. O king, you too 
have never injured them. Why should, 
therefore, these best of men, who are ever 
truthful, give you wicked advice ? 

9. O king, these foremost of men are 
endued with wisdom; they will never give 
you evil advices or say any thing that is 
crooked. 

10. O descendant of Kura, this is my 
firm conviction that being tempted by wealth 
these, learned as they are in the precepts 
of morality, will never utter anything sa¬ 
vouring partizanship. 

11. O descendant of Bharata, I consider 
what they have said is highly beneficial to 
you. O king, the Pandavas are certainly 
your sons as much as Duryodhana and 
others. 

12. therefore, those ministers who give 
you any advice that is fraught with evil in¬ 
tentions towards the Pandavas do not 
really look after your interest. 

13. O king, if there is any partiality 
(for your sons) in your heart, it is certain 
that they who seek to excite it do you no 
good. 

14. therefore, O king, I think these illus¬ 
trious and effulgent persons have not cer¬ 
tainly said anything that leads to evil. You 
however do not understand it. 

15. O best of kings, what these excellent 
men have said regarding the invincibility 
of the Pandavas is perfectly true. Do not 
think otherwise. Be blessed. 

16. O king, can the handsome Pandava 
Sabyashachi Dhananjaya be ever van¬ 
quished in battle even by Maghavata (Indra) 
himself ? 

17. Can the powerful Bhimasena of 
strong arms possessing the might of ten 


thousand elephants be vanquished in battle 
even by the immortals ? 

18. Who having the desire of living can 
vanquish in battle the twins (Nakula and 
Sahadeva), who are like the sons of Yama 
himself and who are both well-skilled in 
battle ? 

19. How can the eldest Pandava 
(Yudhishthira) in whom patience, mercy, for- 
giveness, truth and prowess are always 
present, be ever vanquished ? 

20. Is there any whom they have not 
already vanquished in battle, who have 
Rama (Valadeva) as their ally, Janardana 
(Krishna) as their counsellor, oatyaki as 
their supporter, Drapada as their father- 
in-law and the descendant of Prishata,’ 
Drupada’s son Dhristadyumna and his other 
heroic brothers as their brothers-in-law ? 

21. O descendant of Bharata, remem¬ 
bering this and knowing that their claim to 
the kingdom is even prior to yours, behave 
virtuously towards them. 

22. O king, the stain of calumny is on you 
on account of the act of Purochana. Wash 
yourself off it by kindly behaving towards 
them (the Pandavas). 

23. Your kindly behaviour towards them 
will be for our great good. It will 
protect the lives of all of us of the Kuru race, 
and it will lead to the growth of the whole 
Kshatriya race. 

24. O king, we have formerly waged a 
great war with the king of Drupada;—if 
we can now secure him as an ally, it will 
strengthen our party. 

25. O king, the Dasarahas are numerous 
and powerful. They will be all there where 
Krishna will be. Where Krishna is, victoty 
is certainly there. 

26. O king, unless cursed by the 
celestials, who would seek to effect by means 
of war that which can be effected by 
conciliation ? 

27. O king, having heard that the sons 
of Pritha are alive, the men of the city and 
the country have become exceedingly glad 
and they are all eager to see them. Do 
what will be agreeable to them. 

28—29. Duryodhana, Karna, and the 
son of Suvala, Shakuni, are sinful, foolish and 
young. Do not listen to their words. 

30. O king, endued with all accomplish¬ 
ments as you are, I have told you long ago 
that for the fault of Duryodhana, the subjects 
of this kingdom will be annihilated. 

thus ends the two hundred and seventh 
Section , the words of Vidura t in the Vidura - 
gamana of the Adi Parva . 



8o 


MAHABHARATA. 


Section CCV11I. 

(VIDURAGAMANA PARY'A)— Contd. 

Dhritarashtra said:— 

1. The learned Bhishma, the son of 
Shantanu, and the illustrious Rishi Drona, 
and you yourself, have said the truth and 
what is good for me. 

2. There is no doubt that as those great 
car-warriors, the heroic sons of Kunti, 
are the sons of Fandu, so they are my sons 
also according to ordinance. 

3. As my sons are entitled to this king¬ 
dom, so certainly are the sons of Pandu 
entitled to it. 

4. O Khattwa, go and in due affec¬ 
tionate way, bring them (the Pandavas) 
here along with their mother. O descendant 
of Bharata, bring also with them Krishna 
(Draupadi) of celestial beauty. 

5. From our good fortune the sons of 
Pritha are alive ; from our good fortune 
pritha is alive. From our good fortune 
those great car-warriors have obtained the 
daughter of Drupada. 

6. From our good fortune our strength 
is increased; and from our good fortune 
Parochana is dead. O greatly effulgent 
one, from our good fortune iny great grief is 
also removed. 

Vaishampayana said 

7. O descendant of Bharata, thereupon 
Vidura at the command of Dhritarashtra 
Went to Jagmasena and the Pandavas. 

8. He carried with him numerous jewels 
and various kinds of wealth for Draupadi, 
for the Pandavas and for Jagmasena. 

9. O king, having arrived there, that 
virtuous man, learned in all the Shasiras , 
properly addressed Drupada and waited 
upon him. 

10. He (Drupada) too received Vidura 
in proper form, and they both enquired after 
each other’s welfare. 

11. O descendant of Bharata, he saw 
there the Pandavas and Vasudeva (Krishna). 
He embraced them from affection and en¬ 
quired after their welfare. 

12—14. They too worshipped in due order 
Vidura of immeasurable intelligence. Ac¬ 
cording to the. command of Dhritarashtra, 
he (Vidura) spoke to the sons of Pandu 
again and again words of affection. O king, 
he then gave to the Pandavas, Kunti, 
Draupadi, Drupada and Drupada’s sons, 
the gems and various kinds of wealth, sent 
through him by the Kurus, 


15. The immeasurably intelligent Vidura 
then, in the presence of the Pandavas, 
and Keshava (Krishna), thus modestly ad 
dressed Drupada in words of affection. 

Vidura said =— 

16. O king, listen to my words with your 
sons and ministers. Dhritarashtra with his 
ministers, sons and friends, 

17. Has again and again joyously en¬ 
quired after your welfare. O king, he has 
been pleased by the alliance with you, 

18. The son of Shantanu, the greatly wise 
Bhishma with all the Kurus has enquired 
after your welfare in every respect. 

19. The son of Bharadwaja, the greatly, 
wise Drona, your beloved friend, embracing 
you mentally, has enquired after your wel¬ 
fare. 

20. O Panchala king, Dhritarashtra and 
all the Kurus regard themselves very blessed 
by this alliance with you. 

21. O Jagmasena, this alliance with you 
has made them more happy than if they 
had acquired a new kingdom. 

22. Knowing all this, O Sir, permit the 
Pandavas to go there. The Kurus are 
exceedingly eager to see the sons of Pandu. 

23. These best of men (the Pandavas) 
are long absent (from Hastinapur.) They 
and Pritha (Kunti) must be very eager to 
see their own city. 

24. All the Kuru ladies, all the citizens 
and our subjects are eagerly waiting to sec 
the Panchala princess Krishna. 

25. therefore, O Sir, my opinion is that 
you should permit the Pandavas to go there 
with their wife without any further delay. 

26. O king, when the illustrious Pan¬ 
davas will get your permission, I shall then 
send information to Dhritarashtra by quick 
messengers. Then, O king, the Pandavas 
will set out with Kunti and Krishna 
(Drupadi.) 

thus ends the two hundred and eighth 
chapter, the coloqny of Vidura, in the 
Vaauragamana of the Adi Parva • 


Section CCIX. 

(RAJYALAVA PARVA.) 

Drupada said 

i. O Vidura, O greatly learned man, 
it is as you say. O lord, t too have been 
exceedingly happy by this affiance.. 



At)) PAftVA. 


It is highly proper for these ill list doits 
princess to return to their ancestral kingdom. 
But it is not proper for nu to say this my¬ 
self. 

3—4. tf the hero, Yudhishthira, the son of 
Runti, if Bhima and Arjuna, if these best of 
men the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) and 
if Ram and Krishna, both learned in the 
precepts of religion, wish it, then let the 
Pandavas go there. These two best of men 
(Rama and Krishna) arc ever engaged in 
doing what is agreeable and beneficial to 
them (the Pandavas). 

Yudhishthira said 

5. O king, I with all my brothers, 
am now dependent on you. We shall all 
gladly do what you will command us to do. 

Vaishartpayana said:— 

6. Thereupon Vashudeva said, 4t I am 
of opinion that they should go. But we 
must all abide % by the opinion of the king 
Drupada who is learned in all the precepts 
of virtue.” 

Drupada said 

7. Having considered all the circums- 
ti.ices, I certainly agree with the fore¬ 
most of men, the heroic and mighty armed 
Dasaraha (Krishna). 

8% There is no doubt the illustrious sons 
of Kunti, the Pandavas, are now to me as 
they are to Vashudeva. 

9. The son of Kunti, Yudhishthira, himself 
does not seek the welfare of the Pandavas 
so much as this foremost of men Keshava 
(Krishna) does. 

Vaishampayana said 

10. O king, having been commanded by 
the illustrious Drupada, the Pandavas, 
Krishna, and Vidura 

11. Taking with them the daughter of 
Drupada, Krishna, and the illustrious Kunti, 
journeyed in pleasure towards the city of 
Hastinapur. 

12. The king. Dhritarashtra, learning that 
those heroes (tne Pandavas) had arrived, 
sent out the Kurus to receive them. 

13. O descendant of Bharata, Vikarna, 
the great bowman Chitrasena, the foremost 
of bowmen Drona, and the son of Go tarn a 
Kripa (went out to receive them). 

14. Surrounded by those (illustrious 
men), those mighty heroes (the Pandavas), 
their splendour (many times) increased, 
slowly entered the city of Hastinapur. 

15. The city became radiant with the 
curious sight-seers of the city. Those 
foremost of men, the dispellers of grief and 
sorrow, 


16. The Pandavas, d^.ar to the hearts 
of the people, heard, as they proceeded 
various excla nations which the citizens, ever 
desirous of obeying the wishes of those 
princes, loudly uttered., 

t;. they exclaimed, f ‘Ftere return that 
best of men (Yudhishthira), learned in the 
precepts of virtue. He always protects us 
as if We are his rtearest relatives. 

18. It seems as if the great king 
Pandu, ever beloved of his subjects, re¬ 
turns to-day from the forest to do what is 
agreeable to us. 

19. What good is rtot done to us to¬ 
day when the heroic sons of Kunti returns 
to our city ? 

20—2i If we have ever given away irt 
charity, if We have ever poured libations of 
Ghee on the (sacrificial) fire, if We have 
arty ascetic merit, let the Pandavas live 
in our city for one hundred years.” They 
(the Pandavas) Worshipped the feet of 
Dhritarashtra as also those of B'lbm 1, and 
also the feet of every body else that deserved 
the honour. 

22. They enquired after the Welfare of all 
the Citizens They then entered the palace 
assigned to them at the command of Dhri¬ 
tarastra. 

23. When those illus'rious and greatly 
strong heroes had taken rest for Some time, 
they Were summoned by the king Dhrita 
fastra and the son of Shantanu (Bhishma.) 


24. O sun of Kunti, (Yudhishthira), listen 
with your brothers to what I say. Go to 
Khandavaprastha, so that rto difference 
may arise again. 

25. If you live there, none Will be able 
to injure you. Taking nrtlf of the king¬ 
dom, live at Khandavaprastha protected by 
Partha (Arjuna), as the celestials are by 
the.wielder of the thunder flndra). 

Vaishampayana said:— 

26 Agreeing to What the king saicL 
those best of men worshipped the kings and 
started for that fearful forest. 

27. Receiving half of the k’rtgdom, the 
Pandavas entered the Khandavaprastha, 
Krishna being at the head of the proces¬ 
sion. 

23—30. Those great car-Warriors, select¬ 
ing with the assistance of Dwiipiyana a 
sacred and auspicious place performed the 
propitiatory Ceremonies and measured out 
a piece of land to found a city. It was 
surrounded by a moat as Wide as the s«A 


Dhritarashtra said:— 


36 



232 


mahabharata. 


ami by walls rising high up to the sky. 
It was as white as the white clouds or the 
rays of the moon. 

31. Those foremost of cities looked 
resplendent like the city of Bhagavati of 
the Nagas. It was adorned with man¬ 
sions having windows like the out-stretched 
wings of Garuda. 

32—34.. It was protected with gates 
looking like the clouds, and they were as 
high as the Mandara mountain; the weapons 
of the enemy could not make any impression 
on them. They were almost covered with 
darts and other missiles like the double- 
tongued snakes. The turrets were filled with 
armed men and the walls were lined with 
warriors. It was well-stocked with various 
weapons of attack ; there were thousands 
of snarp hooks and Satanghanis (a sort of 
weapon) and numerous other machines ; 
there were also many iron wheels planted 
on them. With these were adorned that 
best of cities. 

35 —36 The streets were all wide and 
excellently laid out. Adorned with innumer¬ 
able white mansions, the city looked like 
Amaravati (the celestial city) ; it looked 
like a mass of clouds charged with lightnings. 
It came to be called Incjraprastha. 

37. In a delightful and auspicious 
place stood the palace of those descendants 
of Kuril (the Fandavas). It was full of every 
kind of wealth like the palace of the (celestial) 
treasurer (Kuvera) himself. 

38. O king, there came with the desire 
of living (in that city) numerous Brahmanas 
learned in all the Vedas and conversant with 
every langauge. 

39. There came also from every direction 
nemerours merchants with the desire of earn¬ 
ing wealth. There also came with the desire 
of living (in that city) numerous men well- 
skilled in all arts. 

40. Around the city were laid out many 
charming gardens with Amras, Amrutakas, 
Kadamvas, Asokas, C ham pa k as, 

41. Punnagas. Nagas, Lakuchas, Pana- 
sas, Salas, Talas, Tamalas, Vakulas, and 
Ketakas. 

42. They were all beautiful and blossom¬ 
ing ; they oent down with the weight of their 
fruits. The old Amlokas, Lodras, blossom¬ 
ing Ankolas, 

43. Jamvas, Patalas, Kangukas, Ati- 
mukhas, Kuraviras, Parijatas and various 
other trees were there. 

44. All adorned with flowers and fruits 
and thronged with birds of various kinds. 
These verdant groves were resounded 


with the notes of the maddened peacocks 
and Kokilas . 

45 — 47 . There were various pleasure 
houses bright as mirrors, and innumerable 
bowers of creepers, charming artificial hil¬ 
locks, many lakes full to the brim with 
crystal water, and delightful tanks fragrant 
with lotuses and lilies and adorned with 
swans, ducks and Chakravakas. There 
were many tanks overgrown with fine acqit¬ 
alic plants, and various large and beautiful 
ponds. 

48. O great king, the joy of the Panda- 
vas increased from day to day in consequence 
of their residence in that large kingdom 
which was inhabited by pious men. 

49. thus in conseque ice of the virtuous 
conduct cf Bhishma and the king (Dhrita- 
rastra) the Pandavas became the dwellers 
of Khandavaprastha. 

50. Adorned with those excellent and 
great bow-men, each like an Indra himself, 
that best of cities looked like Bhagavati 
with the Nagas. 

51. O king, having settled the Pandavas 
there, the heroic Krishna, on obtaining 
their leave, came back with Ram 1 to 
Dwaravati. 

thus ends the two hnndr • l and ninth 
chapter, the departure of Krishna , in the 
Rajyalava of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCX. 

(RAJYAI.AVA PARVA)— Cant in ued, 

Janamejaya said:— 

1—2. O asc-tic, what did those illustrious 
men, the high-souled ones, my grandrires. 
the Pandavas, do after obtaining the king¬ 
dom of Indraprastha ? How did" their wed¬ 
ded wife Draupadi obey them all ? 

3. How was it that no dissension arose 
amongst those illustrious rulers of men, 
though attached to one wife Krishna ? 

4. O ascetic Rishi, I desire to hear every 
thing in detail as regards their conduct to¬ 
wards one another after their union with 
Krishna. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

5. Having obtained their kingdom at the 
command of Dhritnrastra, those chastisers of 
foes, the Pandavas, sported with Krishna At 
Indraprastha. 

6. Having obtained the kingdom, the 
ever truthful and greatly effulgent Yudhis- 
thira with his brothers virtuously ruled the 
kingdom. 



ADI PAKVA. 


283 


7- Having defeated all their fees, the 
greatly wise and ever devoted to truth and 
virtue, the sons of Pandu lived there in great 
happiness. 

8. Those best of men, seated on costly 
royal seats, discharged all the duties of 
government. 

9. When (one day) those illustrious 
heroes were so seated, there came to them 
the celestial Rishi Narada in course of his 
travels. 

10—11. Yudhishthira gave him his own 
excellent seat. When the celestial Rishi 
was seated, the wise Yudhishthira duly offer¬ 
ed him the Arghya with his own hands. 
The Rishi accepted the worship and became 
very much pleased. 

12. Uttering benedictions on him, he 
(the Rishi) asked him (Yudhishthira) to take 
his seat. thus commanded, the king Yudhis¬ 
thira took his seat. 

13. He sent words to Krishna informing 
her of the arrival of the high-souled (Rishi). 
Hearing it, Draupadi, after properly purify¬ 
ing herself, 

14. Went there where Narada was with 
the Pandavas. And that lady of virtuous 
deeds worshipped his feet. 

15 Then the daughter of Drupadi, being 
properly covered with her veil, stood before 
him with joined hands. That virtuous, 
truthful and excellent Rishi, 

16. The illustrious Rishi Narada, after 
uttering various benedi:tions on the princess, 
and s tying that faultless lady, “Go,' sent 
her away. 

17. When Krishna retired, the illustri¬ 
ous Rishi thus spoke to the Pandavas with 
Yudhishthira at their head. 

Narada said:— 

18. The illustrious princess of Panchala is 
the wed Jed wife of all of you Establish a 
rule amongst yourselves so that no dissension 
may arise amongst you. 

19. There were in the days of yore two 
brothers, celebrated throughout the three 
worlds by the names of Smda and 
Upasanda; they were incapable of being 
killed by any one else except one by the 
other. 

20. They ruled the same kingdom, lived 
in the same house, slept on the same bed, 
sat on the same seat and ate off the same 
dish, yet they killed each other for the 
sake of Tilottama. 

21. O Yudhishthira, therefore preserve 
your friendship for one another, and do that 
which may not produce dissension amongst 
you. 


Yudhisthura said •— 

22. O great Rishi, whose sons were 
Sanda and Upasanda ? How did their 
dissension arise, and why did they kill each 
other? 

23. Whose daughter was the Apsara,. 
the celestial maiden Tilottama? Maddened 
by whose love they killed each other ? 

24. O ascetic, O Brahmana, I desire to 
hear all this in detail as it happened. Our 
curiosity has become very great. 

thus ends the tioi hundred and tenth 
Section , the coloquy of Yudhishthira and 
Narada, in the Rajyalava of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXI. 
(RAJYALAVA PARVA )-contd. 

Narada said:— 

1. O son of Pritha, Yudhishthira, listen 
to it with your brothers, as I narrate this old 
story exactly as every thing happened. 

2. In the days of yore there was a 
Danava chief, named Nikumbha, who was 
energetic and strong, and who was born in 
the race of Hiranyakashipu. 

3. Two sons were born to him, named 
Sanda and Upasanda, both of them being 
cheifs of the Danavas, and both of them 
being very energetic and powerful, very 
fearful and wicked-minded. 

4. Those two Danavas were both of the 
same resolution, and always engaged in per¬ 
forming the same work and in achieving 
the same end. They were ever the same to 
each other in weal and in woe. 

5. Each speaking and doing what was 
agree ible to each other, the brothers never 
ate unless they were together and never 
went anywhere unless together. 

6. Of exactly the same dispositions and 
habits, they seemed to be one individual 
divided into two parts. Possessing great 
energy and the same resolution in every 
thing, the brothers thus gradually [grew up. 

7. Always entertaining the same pur- 
pjse, and ever desiring of subjugating the 
three worlds, the brothers went after due ini 
tiation to the mountains of Vyndhya ; and 
going there, they performed severe penances. 

8. They performed penances fora very 
long time till at last they received suffi¬ 
cient ascetic merits. 

9. Exhausted with hunger and thirst, 
with ma ted locks on (heir heidi and attire J 
in bants of trees, besmearing themselves 
with dirts from head to foot, living on air 



2&f 


MAIIABHARATA. 


alone, and standing on the toes of their own 
legs, they poured into fire pieces of flesh 
from their own body. With arms upraised 
and fixed eyes, they observed their vows for a 
long period. 

10. (During the course of their ascetic 
penances), a wonderful incident happen¬ 
ed. The Vindhya mountain, heated by 
their ascetic penances for many long 
years, began to emit vapours from every 
part of its body. 

11. Thereupon, seeing their severe pen¬ 
ances the celestials were alarmed. The 
celestials threw many obstacles for imped¬ 
ing their asceticism. 

12. They again and again tempted them 
with gems and jewels and the most hand¬ 
some maidens. But those two (brothers), 
firmly engaged in asceticism, did not break 
their .vows. 

13—14. Then the celestials displayed 
Muya (delusion) before those (two) illustrious 
Rishis. It appeared to them as if their 
sisters, mothers, wives and other relatives, 
with dishevelled hair, ornaments and robes, 
were running towards them in terror, pur¬ 
sued and struck down by a Rakshasha who 
had a lance in his hands. 

15. It appeared as if they were all crying, 
” O save us ! O save us.” But even this 
could not break the vows of those two great 
vow-observing Rishis. 

16. When all this did not produce any 
impression on any of the two (Rishis), then 
the women and all the other apparitions 

wa lishei (into space). 

17. Thereupon the Grandsire (Brahma) 
bvmself came to those two heroes, and the 
Lord, who seeks the welfare of all, asked 
them to solicit the boon they desired.| 

18. Then the two greatly powerful bro¬ 
thers, Sanda and Upasanda, rose from their 
Seat on seeing the Grandsire, and they stood 
before him with joined hands. 

19. They both together spoke thus to 
that celestial Lord, “ O Grandsire, if you 
are pleased with our worship, 

20. And, O lord, if you are propitious 
to us, let us then possess the knowledge of 
all weapons and of all powers of Maya 
(delusion) ; let us possess great strength and 
assume any form at will; let us oe im¬ 
mortal. 

Brahma said:— 

21. Except being immortal, you two will 
be all that you desire. Ask for some death 
by which you may be equal to the immortals. 


22. As you have performed these severe 
penances from the desire of sovereignty 
alone, I cannot bestow on you the boon of 
immortality. 

23. You have undergone your ascetic 
penances for the subjugation of the three 
worlds ; O chiefs of the Danavas, it is for 
this l cannot grant you what you desire 

Sanda and Upasanda said:— 

24. O Grandsire, let us then have no 
fear from any created thing, mobile or iramo 
bile in the three worlds, except only from 
each other. 

The Grandsire said:— 

25. 1 grant you what you have asked, 
said and desired. Your death is fixed 
according to your own desire. 

Narada said:— 

26. Having granted them this boon, the 
Grandsire made them desist from their asce¬ 
ticism , and he then went away to the 
region of Brahma. 

27. Having received those boons, those 
two brothers, the chiefs of Danavas, be¬ 
came non-slayable by any creature in the 
universe. They then returned to their own 
home. 

28. Seeing those intelligent beings success¬ 
ful in their desire and crowned with success 
as regards the boon, their friends and re¬ 
latives became exceedingly glad. 

29. They then cut off their matted locks 
and wore coronets on their heads. They 
adorned and attired themselves in costly 
ornaments and handsome robes. 

30. They made the moon to rise untimely 
and at all times ; and all their friends and 
relatives were always in joy. 

31. 44 Eat, 1 ” 44 Feed,/ “Give” 44 Make 
merry,” 44 Sing,” 4  Drink,”—such sounds 
were heard in every house (in their city) 

32. Here and there arose loud uproars 
of merriment, mixed with the clappings of 
hands which filled the city of those two 
Danavas. 

33. The Danavas, capable of assuming 
any form at will, engaged themselves in 
every kind of amusements and sports. They 
scarcity noticed that time was passing away. 
They regarded a whole year as if it was but 
a day. 

thus ends the two hundred and eleventh 
Section , the history of Sanda and 
Upasanda , in the Kafyalava of the Adi 
Parra, 



ADI PARVA. 


85 


Section C C X II. 

(RAJYALAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Narada said:— 

1. As soon as the festivities came to an 
end, they (Sanda and Upasanda), bei ig de¬ 
sirous of the sovereignty of the three worlds, 
took counsel and commanded their forces to 
be arranged. 

2. Having obtained the consent of their 
friends and relatives, of the elders, of the 
Danava race and of their ministers, and 
having performed the priliminary rites of 
departure, they started on the night when 
the constellation Magha was on the ascend¬ 
ant. 

3. A large army of the Danavas clad in 
mails and armed with clubs, axes, lances 
and mices, went with them. 

4. The Charanas chaunted auspicious 
panegyrics indicative of their future victory; 
and they set out 6n their expedition with 
joyous hearts. 

5. Furious in war and capable of going 
everywhere at will, the two Danavas rose 
to the sky and went to the region of the 
celestials. 

6. Learning that they were coming and 
knowing also what boons they had obtained 
from the Supreme lord, the celestials left 
heaven and sought refuge in the region of 
Brahma. 

7. The greatly powerful (Danava) 
brothers subjugated the region of Indra and 
defeated various tribes of Yakshas and 
Rakshashas. They then returned. 

8 . The two great car-warriors then sub¬ 
jugated the Nagas of the nether regions, 
then the inmates of the ocean, and then 
all the Mlecha races. 

9. Being desirous of subjugating the 
whole earth, those two greatly irresistible 
heroes, summoning their soldiers, spoke 
these cruel words, 

10. “The royal sages with the help of the 
Brahmanas increase the strength and pros¬ 
perity of the celestials by pouring libations 
on the fire and offering other foods in grand 
sacrifices. 

11. Engaged in such works, they are the 
enemies of the Asuras. therefore, the duty 
of all of us is to muster together and exter¬ 
minate them.’ 1 

12. thus ordering them all on the eastern 
shore of the great ocean and forming such 
a cruel resolution, the Asura brothers 
started in all directions. 


13. The two heroes immediately killed 
those that were performing sacrifices, and 
the Brahmanas tnat were assisting in those 
sacrifices. Killing them all, they started for 
another place. 

14. Their soldiers threw into the water 
the sacrificial fires that were in the her¬ 
mitages of Rishis who had controlled their 
souls. 

15. The curses uttered by the high- 
souled ascetics in an^er became futile on 
account of the boons granted to them (by 
Brahma) ; but they did not any way affect 
them. 

16. When the Brahmanas saw that their 
curses make no impressions on them like 
arrows shot at stones, they fled in all direc¬ 
tions, forsaking their rites and vows. 

17. Even those, that were crowned with 
ascetic success in the world and that were 
self-controlled and wholly engrossed in 
meditation of the Deity, fled in their fear as 
snakes at the approach of the son of 
Vinata (Garuda). 

18. All the sacred hermitages were 
trodden down and broken; and their contents 
were scattered all over the ground. The 
universe became empty, as if every thing 
was destroyed at a Dissolution. 

19. O king, when all the Rishis had 
disappeared, the two great Asuras resolved 
upon their destruction and assumed various 
forms. 

20. They assumed the forms of maddened 
elephants with temples rent (from excess of 
Juice), and they slaughtered the Rishis 
hidden in mountain caves. 

21. Sometime they became lions, some¬ 
time tigers, and sometime, they disap¬ 
peared By assuming such forms, they 
killed the Rishis wherever they saw them. 

22. Sacrifice and study ceased kings 
and Brahmanas were exterminated. The 
earth became destitute of festivals and 
sacrifices. 

23. The people cried, “Alas ! Alas!” And 
all buying and selling were stopped. The 
works of the celestials ceased and sacred 
ceremonies and marriages discontinued. 

24. Agriculture was neglected and cattle 
were not tended; both cities and hermitages 
became desolute. The earth, being covered 
with bones and skeletons, looked fearful 

25. The ceremonies in honour of the 
Pitris, the sacred sound of Vashata (Vedas) 
and all auspicious rites ceased. The uni¬ 
verse looked frightful to behold. 

26. The moon, the sun, the planets, the 
stars, the constellations, and the dwellers of 



MAHABHARATA. 




heaven, became exceedingly sorry on seeing 
these works of Sanda and Upasanda. 

27. thus subjugftting all the points of 
heaven by cruel acts, the Danavas lived at 
Kurukheshtra, having not a single rival (in 
all the earth.) 

thus ends the two hundred and twelfth 
Section , the history of Sanda and Upa - 
sanda , in the Rajyalava of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXIH. 

(RAJYALAVA PARVA)— contd. 

Karada said 

1. Thereupon the tranquil and self- 
restrained celestial Rishis, Sidhyas and the 
Paramahansas, became exceedingly sorry on 
seeing that great massacre. 

2. Being moved by compassion, they 
with their passions, senses and souls under 
complete control, went to the abode of 
the Grandsire. 

3. They then saw the Grandsire seated 
with the celestials, surrounded by the 
Sidhyas and the Brahmarshis. 

4. There was the Deity Mahadeva (Siva), 
there was Agni with Vayu. There were 
Chandra, Aditya, Indra and the Rishis 
devoted to the contemplation of the Supreme. 

5. (There were) the Vaikhanasas, the 
Valikhilyas, the Vanaprasthas, the Mari- 
chipas, the Agas, the Avimudas and many 
other greatly effulgent ascetics. 

6. All the Rishis came to the Grandsire, 
and those great Rishis all approached him 
with sorrowful hearts. 

7—8, They represented to him all the 
acts of Sanda and Upasanda. The celestials 
and the great Rishis told the Grandsire of 
the universe in detail what they had done, 
and how and in what order they had done it. 

9—id. They all pressed the matter to 
the Grandsire, and the Grandsire, having 
heard what they said, reflected for a moment 
and settled what ought to be done. Re¬ 
solving to kill them, he summoned Vishwa- 
karma. 

11. Seeing Vishwakarma, the Grandsire 
coinmanded him saying, “ O great ascetic, 
create a damsel who will be captivating to 
all hearts 1 " 

12. Bowing down to the Grandsire, and 
receiving his command with reverence, he 
created a celestial damsel after good deal 
of thought. 


13. Vishwavita (VishwakarmA) first 
collected whatever handsome there was in 
mobile or immobile thingsjin the three worlds. 

14. He placed millions of gems on the 
body of the damsel. The celestial beauty 
that he created was a mass of gems and 
jewels. 

15. She was created by Vishwakarma 
with good deal.of care. She became match¬ 
less in beauty amongst the women of the 
three worlds. 

16. There was not the minutest part of 
her body which by its wealth of beauty did 
not rivet the gaze of the beholder directed 
towards it. 

17. She was like Lakshmi herself; and 
that extraordinarily beautiful damsel capti¬ 
vated the eyes and hearts of all creatures. 

18. Because she was created with the 
portions of every gem in every minute 
portion, the Grandsire gave her the name 
of Tilottama, 

19. She bowed down to Brahma and 
spoke to him with joined hands, “ O lord 
of creatures, what task am I to accomplish, 
and for what purpose am I created ? ” 

The Grandsire said 

20. O Tilottama, go to the Asuras, Sanda 
and Upasanda. O amiable girl, tempt them 
with your desirable beauty. 

21. Act in such a way that as soon as 
they saw you they may quarrel with each 
other in consequence of your wealth of 
beauty. 

22. She promised to do it; and bowing 
down to the Grandsire, she walked round 
the celestial assembly. 

23. The illustrious Deity (Brahma) was 
then sitting facing eastwards; Mahadeva 
(Siva) also was sitting facing eastwards ; all 
the other celestials with their faces north¬ 
wards and the Rishis with their faces to¬ 
wards all directions. 

24. When she was walking round the 
assembly, Indra and the illustrious Sthanu 
(Siva) alone succeeded in preserving their 
tranquility of mind. 

25. Because he (Siva) was very much 
desirous of seeing her, therefore when she 
came at his side, another face came out on 
the southern side of his body with eyes like 
full-blossmed lotuses. 

26—27.. When she came behind him,— 
another face appeared on his western side ; 
and when she came on the northern side, a 
fourth face appeared on his northern side. 
Indra also came to have one thousand eyes 
before, behind and on his flanks, each large 
and reddish. 



ADI PARVA. 


28. thus in days of yore, Sthanu (Siva) 
the great Deity, came to have four faces, and 
the slayer of Vala (Indra) one thousand 
eyes. 

29. All the celestials and the Rishis 
turned their faces to that direction where 
Tilottama went in her walking round the 
assembly. 

30. Except those of the Deity, the divine 
Grandsire, the eyes of all those illustrious 
beings fell on her body. 

31. When that great beauty went away, 
the celestials and the great Rishis regarded 
the task already accomplished. 

32. After Tilottama had departed, the 
First Cause of the creation (Brahma) sent 
away all the celestials and the Rishis. 

thus ends the two hundred and thirteenth 
Section , the creation of Tilottama, in the 
Rajyalava of the Adi Parva. 


Section CCXIV. 

(RAJYALAVA PARVA)— Continued. 

Narada said 

1. Subjugating the whole earth, the two 
Danavas became unrivaled ; and when they 
had brought the three worlds under their sway, 
they then considered themselves free from 
fatigue and regarded that their works were 
done. 

2. Having taken all the wealth of the 
Devas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the 
Nagas, the Rakshashas, the kings, they 
become exceedingly happy. 

3 - When they saw they had no rival, 
hke the immortals they gave up all labour 
and exertion, and they passed their time in 
pleasures and merriments. 

4. They derived great pleasure in 
? ror ^ e P»  n garlands, in perfumes, in viands, 
in drinks and in various other articles of 
enjoyments. 

5 Like the immortals they roamed in 
profuse pleasure and amusement in houses, 
m woods, in gardens, in forests and on hills, 
—nay wherever they liked. 

6. Thereupon one day they went to 
sport to a table-land of the Vindhya moun¬ 
tain,—on perfectly level and stony ground, 
overgrown with Sala trees blossomed with 
flowers. 

7  After every object of desire of the 
most agreeable kind had been brought, they 
(banda and Upasanda) sat on an excellent 
seat in happiness and joy with many hand¬ 
some women (around them). 


'287 

8 . Wishing to please those two (heroes), 
those damsels danced in accompaniment 
with music and sang many songs in praise 
of the mighty brothers. 

9 - Thereupon Tilottama, attired in a 
S |?? e r L c l°th and thereby exposing 

all her charms, came there gathering flowers 
in the forest. 

10. Gathering Karnikaras that grew 
along the banks of the river, she slowly 
came to the place where those two great 
heroes were. 

11. They were intoxicated with a 
large quantity of liquor and their eyes had 
grown red. As soon as shey saw that 
most beautiful damsel, they were filled with 
desire, 

12. Leaving their seat, they immediately 
went to the place where she was. Both 
being full of desire, both sought her favours. 

13. Sanda caught that beauty of fair eye¬ 
brows by her right hand, and Upasanda 
caught hold of the left hand of Tilottama. 

14. Intoxicated with the boons that thfcy 
had obtained, with their physical strength, 
with the wealth and gems they had 

I amassed, and with the wine they had drunk. 

15- Intoxicated with all this and 
maddened with desire, each of them con¬ 
tracted his eye-brows in anger ; and they 
then spoke thus to each other. 

16. Sanda said, “She is my wife and 
your superior." Upasanda said, “She is my 
wife and your sister-in-law. " 

17. They each exclaimed, “She is mine 
not yours." Maddened by her beauty, they 
lost all love and friendship (that they bore 
for each other). 

18. For her sake they went for their 
maces, and deprived of their reason by desire 
they took of their fearful clubs. 

19. (Crying), “I was the first," “I was the 
first" (in taking her hand), they attacked 
each other. Struck by those fearful clubs, 
both of them fell on the ground ; 

20. Their bodies being covered with blood 
they looked like two suns loosened from tlfe 
sky. The women and the others that were 
present all fled away trembling in grief and 
fear; and they took refuge in the nether 
regions. 

21. Thereupon the pure souled Grandsire 
with the celestials and great Rishis came 
there and applauded Tilottama. 

22. The illustrious Grandsire cheered 
her by granting boons. Before she s£>oke‘, 
the Grandsire thus spoke in cheerfulness, 

23. “O beautiful damsel, you shall roam 
in the region of the suns. Your splendour 



288 


MAHABHARATA. 


will be so great that none will ever be able 
to look at;you.” 

24. Having granted this boon to her, the 
Grandsire of all creatures, the Supreme lord, 
placed Indra over the region of Ind.a and 
went away to the region of Brahma. 

25. thus those two Asuras, ever united 
and inspired with the same purpose, killed 
each other in anger for the sake of 
Tilott&ma. 

26. O best of the Bharata race, there¬ 
fore, from affection for you all, I tell you 
that if you wish to do anything agreeable 
to me, make some such arrangement as 
you may not quarrel with one another for 
the sake of Draupadi. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

27—29. O king having been thus ad¬ 
dressed by the high-souled great Rishi 
Narada, they (the Pandavas) consulted with 
one another, and established a rule in the 
presence of the celestial Rishi of immeasurable 
energy that when one of them would be 
with Draupadi, any of the other four, who 
would see that one, must goto the forest 
for twelve years to lead the life of a Brahma - 
chart. After the virtuous PanJavas had 
established this rule amon>st themselves, 
the great Rishi Narada, being pleased with 
them, went to the place he wished (to go). 

30. O descendant of Bharata, thus re¬ 
quested by Narada, they (the Pandavas) 
made in the days of yore a rule amongst 
themselves with respect to their common 
wife. It was therefore, that no dispute ever 
arose amongst them. 

thus ends the two hundred and fourteenth 
chapter, the history of San ia and Upasanda , 
in the Rajyalava of the Adi Farva . 


Section CCXY. 

(ARYUNA VANAVASHA PARVA.) 

V&ishampayana said 

1. Having made that rule (amongst 
themselves,) the Pandavas continued to live 
there (at Khandhavaprastha). They brought 
under their sway many kings by their 
prowess of arms. 

2. Krishna (Draupadi) became obedient 
to all the five sons of Pritha,—those five 
best -men of immeasurable energy. 

3 She became exceedingly happy in 
her five heroic husbands as the Saraswati 
in elephants; and they (the Pandavas) also 
were exceedingly happy in her. 


4. In consequence of the ifiustrtoiH 
Pandavas being virtuous, all the Kurus, 
being free from sin and becoming very 
happy, grew in prosperity. 

5. O king, O best of monarchs, many 
days after (it so happened) that a robber 
stole some kine of a certain Brahmana. 

6. When his wealth (kine) was thus stolen, 
the Brahmana lo$t;his senses in anger ; and 
coming to Khandavaprastha, he thus reproved 
the Pandavas. 

The Brahmana said 

7. O Pandavas, despicable and wicked 
wretches are robbing away my kine in your 
dominion. Parsue the robbers. 

8. Alas ; the sacrificial Ghee of a peaceful 
Brahmana is being carried away by crows. 
Alas, the wretched jackal is invading the 
empty cave of a lion ! 

9. A king, who takes the sixth part of 
the produce, but does not protect his subjects, 
is called by all men as the most sinful in 
all the worlds. 

10. The wealth of a Brahmana is being 
taken away by thieves; virtue is going to be 
destroyed. Take me up by the nand, for I 
am in great grief. 

V&ishampayana said 

11. thus were the Pandavas reproved 
by the Brahmana weeping in bitter grief. 
'I he son of Kunti, D.iananjaya (Arjuna) 
heard his (weeping) words. 

12. As soon as he heard it, the mighty- 
armed hero told the Brahmana, " Don’t fear’. 
But in the room where the arms of the 
illustrious Pandavas were, 

13. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was then 
sitting with Krishna (Draupadi). The Pan- 
dava (Arjuna) was, therefore, unable to 
enter the room or to go (with the Brahmana). 

14. Being repeatedly urged by the 
weeping words of the Brahmana, the son 
of Kunti (Arjuna) pondered in sorrow. 

Arjuna said 

15. “ Alas, this ascetic Brahmana’s 
wealth is being robbed ! It is certainly my 
duty to dry up his tears. 

16. If I do not protect him who is 
weeping at our gate, the king (Yudhishthira) 
will be touched by sin for my indiffe¬ 
rence. 

17. Our own irrcligiousness will also be 
talked all over the kingdom, and we shall 
certainly incur a great sin. 



ADI PARVA. 


289 


tS. There is no doubt that if 1 enter 
(the room) disregarding the king, I shall 
not truthfully behave towards that enemiless 
monarch. 

19-^20. If I enter (the room) where the 
king is, an exile in the forest will be my lot. 
But I must overlook every thing. I do not 
care if I am to incur sin by disregarding 
the king. I care not if I am to go to the 
forest and die there. Virtue is superior to 
body, and it lasts after the body perishes. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

21. O king, having resolved this, the son 
of Kunti Dhananiaya (Arjuna) entered the 
room and talked with the king (Yudhis- 
thira). 

22—23. Bringing the bow, he cheerfully 
told the Brahmana, “O Brahmana, come 
soon, so that those Wretched thieves may 
not go far off. I shall accompany you and 
restore to you your wealth that has fallen 
into the hands of the robbers." 

24. He then went away, armed with bow» 
cased in mail, riding on the chariot and 
holding the standard. Piercing those 
thieves with arrows, he took back that wealth 
(kine). 

25. thus helping the Brahmana by re¬ 
turning to him his kine and winning great 
renown, the Pandava, 

26. The heroic Shabyasachi Dhananjaya 
returned to the city. He then bowed to all 
the elders and was in return congratulated 
by them all. 

27. He then said to Dharmaraja (Yu- 
dhisthira), “ O Lord, give me permission to 
observe the vow. The rule that was estab¬ 
lished by us has been violated by me on my 
seeing you. 

28. I shall go into exile to the forest, 

for we made this’ rule." Suddenly hearing 
those most painful words uttered (by Arvunaf 
Yudhishthira J 

, 2 9 — 3 °« Was afflicted with grief and said 
in an agitated voice, “Why?” Then Yudhis¬ 
thira thus spoke in grief to his vowobserv- 
ing brother Gudakesha (curly haired) Dha¬ 
nanjaya (Arjuna), “O sinless one, if I am an 
authority worthy of regard, listen to what I 
say. 

31 O hero, I know full well why you 
entered the room and did what you thought 
would be disagreeable to me. But I have 
not felt any displeasure for it. 

32. The younger brother may enter the 
room in which his elder brother sits with 
his wife. There is no fault to be found in 
this. If the elder brother enters the room 
where his younger brother is with his wife, 
then he acts against the rules of propriety. 


3 $- O mighty-armed hero, therefore, 
desist from your purpose. Do what I say. 
Your virtue has suffered no diminution, and 
you have not also shown any disregard 
towards me. 

Arjuna said 

34. I have heard from you that the 
virtue should not be practised by quibbling, 
I shalj not waver from truth Truth is my 
weapon. 

Vaishampayana said 

35. Having obtained the king's permis 
sion, he made preparations to live in the 
forest. He went away to dwell in the forest 
for twelve years. 

thus ends the two hundred and fifteenth 
Section , the departure of Arjuna , for the 
forest , in the Arjuna Vanavasha of the Adi 
Parva . 


Section CCXVt. 
(ARYUNA VANAVASHA PARVA) 

— Continued . 

Vaishampayana said 

1. When that mighty-armed heft), the 
spreader of the fame of the Kuru race, went 
away, the Vedaknowing Brahmanas follow 
ed him. 

2. Followed by the Veda and Vedanga 
knowing Brahmanas, ever devoted in the 
contemplation of the Supreme spirit, by per 
sons skilled in music, by ascetics devoted to 
the Diety, by Pouratiika Sutas (men learn 
ed in the Puranas) , 

3. By Kathakas (the reciters of sacred 
stories), by celebate devotees, by dwellers of 
forests, by Brahmanas who recited sweetly 
the celestial histories. 

4. And by many other sweetspeeched 
men. With those men, the son of Pandu 
(Arjuna) travelled over the country like 
Indra followed by the Marutas. 

5—6. O descendant of Bharatn, that best 
of men (Arjuna) saw many charming and 
picturesque forests, lakes, rivers, seas, and 
countries, and many sacred pilgrimages. 
Coming to the source of the Ganges, thfe 
lord (Arjuna) thought of dwelling there. 

7. O Tanamejaya, listen to the wonder¬ 
ful feat which that foremost of the Pandav&s, 
the high‘SOuled hero, performed. 

8. O descendant of Bharata, when the 
son of Kunti (Arjuna) and the Brahmanas 
lived there, the latter performed many Agni 
hotras (fire sacrifices). 


37 



2QO 


mahabharata. 


9—io. O king, in consequence of those 
learned, vow-observing, undeviatingly righ¬ 
teous Brahmanas’ daily establishing and 
kindling fires for their sacrifices on the banks 
of that sacred river, and pouring libations of 
Ghee into it and worshipping it with flowers, 
that region from which the Ganges flowed 
became exceedingly beautiful, 

11. One day that best of the Pandavas, 
the son of Kunti (Arjuna), in order to per¬ 
form his ablutions, went to the Ganges which 
flowed in the midst of the Brahmanas. 

12. O king, after performing his ablu¬ 
tions, and offering water to the grandsires, 
as he was getting out of the water with the 
desire of performing his sacrificial rites 
before the fire, 

13. O great king, the mighty-armed 
hero was dragged into water by the daughter 
of the Naga king, named Ulupi, maddened 
with desire. 

14—15. He saw a fire there in the house 
of the Naga, named Kaurava, and the son 
of Kunti, Dhananjaya, performed his sacri¬ 
ficial rites with devotion before that fire. 
Agni was much pteased to see the fearless¬ 
ness with which he poured the libations. 

16. Having performed the sacrificial 
rites before the fire, the son of Kunti 
(Arjuna) spoke thus smilingly to the 
daughter of the Naga king. 

Arjuna said:— 

17. O handsome maiden, O timid girl, 
what a bold act you have performed! O 
blessed damsel, where is this beautiful 
region situated 1 Who are you and whose 
daughter are you ? 

Ulupi said 

18. O king, there is a Naga, named 
Kaurava, born in the race of Airavata. 
I am his daughter,—I am the Naga 
maiden, named Ulupi. 

19. O best of men, seeing you descend 
into the river in order to perform your ablu¬ 
tions, I was deprived ot my senses by the 
god of love. 

20. O descendant of Kuru, I am still 
unmarried. O sinless one, afflicted as 1 am 
by the god of love, gratify me to-day by 
giving yourself up to me. 

Arynna said:— 

21. O amiable girl, commanded by 
Dharmaraja (Yudhishthira), I am observing 
Brahmacharya for twelve years. I am not 
in my own sway. 


22. O acquatic lady, I am desirous of 
doing what is agreeable to you. I have 
never before .spoken an untruth in my life. 

23. therefore, tell me, O^snake-lady, how 
I may act so that while doing your pleasure, 
I may not be guilty of any untruth or sin 

Ulupi said 

24. O son of Pandu, I know why you 
are roaming over the World and why you 
observe Brahmacharya at the command of 
your elder (brother). 

25—26. This was the rule which all of 
you made amongst you for having Draupadi 
as your common wife, that he who would by 
ignorance enter the room in which one of 
you would be with her, he must adopt 
Brahmacharya for twelve years. The ex¬ 
ile of any of you, therefore, is only for the 
.sake of Draupadi. 

27. You are but observing that vow. 
Your virtue cannot suffer any diminution, 
O large-eyed hero, it is your duty to relieve 
the distressed. 

28—2p. Your virtue cannot suffer any 
diminution by relieving me. O Arjuna, n 
your virtue (really) suffer a small diminu¬ 
tion, you will acquire great merit by re¬ 
lieving me. O Partha, I am your adorer. 
O lora, accept me. This is the opinion of 
the wise. 

30. If you do not accept me, know that 
I will destroy myself. O mighty-armed 
hero, earn great merit by saving my life. 

31. O best of men, I solicit your protec¬ 
tion. O son of Kunti, you always protect 
the destressed and the helpless. Weeping 
in sorrow 1 solicit your protection. 

32. Being filled with desire, I woo you. 
therefore, do what is agreeable to me. 
You should gratify my wish by giving up 
yourself to me. 



33. thus addressed by the daughter o 
the Naga king, the son of Kunti, making 
virtue his motive, did everything as she 
desired. 

34. The powerful hero passed the night 
in the mansion of the Naga and rose with 
the rise of the sun. From the mansion of 
Kaurava, 

35. He came with her (Ulupi) back to 
the region from which the Ganges flowed 
to the plains. Taking his leave, the chaste 
Ulupi returned to her own abode. 

36. O descendant of B ha rata, she Rave a 
boon (to Arjuna) making him invincible in 



ADI PARVA. 


2£1 


water. (She said), “Every acquatic creature 
will certainly be vanquished by you.” 

thus ends the two hundred and sixteenth 
chapter, the meeting with Ulupi , in the 
Arjuna Vanavasha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXVII. 
(ARYUNA VANAVASHA PARVA) 

— Continued . 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O descendant of Bharata, the son of the 
wielder of thunder (Indra), having narrated 
everything to the Brahmanas, started for the 
side of the Himalayas. 

2. Arriving first at Agasla Vata, the son 
of Kunti, then went to the Vashistha's 
hill. On the peak of Brigu hill he perfoim- 
ed his ablutions. 

3. O descendant of Bharata, the best of 
the Kurus gave away to many Brahmanas 
thousands of kine and houses. 

4 That best of men then bathed at the 
pilgrimage, named Hiranyavindu, and then 
that best of the Pandavas went to many 
other sacred places. 

5. O best of the Bharata race, that 
best of men accompanied by the Brahmanas 
then descended (from those hills) and 
travelled towards the east, wishing to see 
the countries situated in that direction. 

6 —8. The best of the Kurus saw the 
pilgrimages one after the other. O descend¬ 
ant of Bharata, he saw the river Utpalosa 
in the forest of Naimisha ; (he saw) the 
Nanda , the Upananda, the famous Kausika, 
the great rivers Gaya and Ganga and other 
Tirthas and hermitages where he purified 
himself and gave away to the Brahmanas 
(many) kine. 

9. Whatever Tirthas and other holy 

laces were in Anga, Banga and Kalinga, 

e went to all of them. 

10. O descendant of Bharata, seeing 
them all and performing many ceremonies 
and giving away much wealth, he went to 
the gate of the kingdom of Kalinga where 
the Brahmanas, wno were following him, 
bade the son of Kunti farewell and desisted 
from following him any further. 

11. Having obtained their leave, the son 
of Kunti, the brave Dhananjaya, accom¬ 
panied by only a few attendants, went there 
where the sea was. 

12. Crossing (the country of) the Ka- 
lingas and seeing on his way many countries, 
holy places, and charming mansions, that 
lord proceeded on. 


13. Seeing the Mahendra mountain 
adorned with the ascetics, and going slowly 
along the sea-shores, he went to Manipur., 

14. O king, seeing all Tirthas and other 
holy places, the mighty-armed hero went 

15. To the king of Manipur, the virtuous 
Chitravabana, who had a beautiful daughter 
named Chitrangada. 

16. He saw her in his capital roaming at 
pleasure. Seeing the handsome daughter of 
Chitravabana, he was filled with desire. 

17. Going to the king, he told him what he 
desired, saying, “O king, give your daught¬ 
er to a son of an illustrious Kshatriya.” 

18. Having heard this, the king said, 
44 Whose son are you and what is your 
name?” He (Arjuna) replied, ,4 I am the 
Pandava, the son of Kunti, Dhananjaya.” 

19. The king then spoke thus in sweet 
accents, 4 ‘There was born a king in our race 
named Pravanjana. 

20. He was childless. In order to get a 
child he performed excellent penances. By 
his severe austerities, the god of gods, the 
wielder of Pinaka (Siva), 

21. The supreme lord, the god of gods, 
and the husband of Uma, O Partha, was 
gratified. The illustrious Deity gave him 
the boon that only one child would be born 
in our race (in succession). 

22. Thence only one child is born to 
every successive descendant of this race. 
All my ancestors had each a male child. 

23. But I have only a daughter to 
perpetuate my race. O best 01 men, I 
always consider her as my son. 

24—25. O best of the Bharata race, 
I have made her a Putrika (heir). O 
descendant of Bharata, the one son that will 
be born to her will be the perpetuator of my 
race. That son will be the dower in this 
marriage. O Pandava, you can take her 
if you like on this condition. 

26. Promising to do it, he accepted that 
maiden, and the son of Kunti lived in that 
city for three years. 

27. When she gave birth to a son, he 
(Arjuna) embraced her with affection, and 
taking leave of the king, he set out again in 
his travels. 

thus ends the two hundred and seven¬ 
teenth chapter, the marriage with Chitran¬ 
gada , in the Arjuna Vanavasha of the Adi 
Parva . 



MAHABHARATA. 


292 


Section CC XVIII. 

((ARYUNA VANAVASHA PARVA) 
— Continued. 

Vaishampayana said 

1. That best of the Bharata race Arjuna 
then went to the- sacred Tirthas situated 
on the shores of the south sea, all adorned 
with the ascetics. 

2. There were five Tirthas where also 
lived many ascetics, but these sacred waters 
themselves were shunned by the ascetics. 

3. (They were named) Agastya, Sau- 
bhadra, the greatly holy Paulama, Karan- 
dhama which yielaed the fruit of a horse- 
sacrifice, 

4. And the great washer of sins Bhara- 
dwaja ;—these five Tirthas that best of men 
saw. 

5—6. The Pandava, the descendant o 
Kuru (Arjuna), finding them uninhabited 
and ascertaining that they were shunned 
by the ascetics, asked with joined hands 
those pious men that lived near them, “Why 
these Tirthas are shunned by the Brahma - 
badis (the utterers of the Vedas).’ 

The Celestials said 

7. O descendant of Kuru, there dwell (in 
their waters) five large crocodiles which carry 
away the ascetics (who go to bathe in them); 
therefore these Tirthas are shunned by all. 

Vaishampayana said 

8. Having heard these words of the 
ascetics, the mighty armed hero, that best 
of men, though dissuaded by them, went to 
see those Tirthas . 

9. Then coming to that excellent Tirtha, 
Sauvadra, named after a great Rishi, that 
hero, that chastiser of foes, plunged into it 
to take a bath. 

10. Thereupon a large crocodile under 
the water seized the leg of that best of men, 
the son of Kunti Dhananjaya. 

ti. But the mighty-armed, the son of 
Kunti, the foremost of all strong men, seized 
that acquatic animal and dragged it up to 
the shore. 

12. Dragged up by the illustrious Arjuna, 
that crocodile became a most handsome 
woman adorned with all ornaments. 

13. O king, that charming and celestial¬ 
like damsel appeared to shine in her own 
beauty. Thereupon the son of Kunti 
Dhananjaya, seeing that wonderful sight, 

14. Spoke thus in great happiness to 
to that lady, “O beautiful lady, who are 


you ? O lady of the lake, where do you 
live ? Why did you commit such a dreadful 
sin before?” 


Barga said:— 

15. O mighty-armed hero, I am an 
Apsara, a sporter in the celestial gardens. 
O greatly strong one, my name is Barga, 
1 am ever beloved of the celestial treasurer 
(Kuvera). 


16. I had four other friends, all hand¬ 
some and all capable of going everywhere 
at will. One day accompained by them, 1 was 
going to the abode of the protector of the 
world; 


17. When we were all going, we saw a 
Brahmana of rigid vows, who was exceed¬ 
ingly handsome and who was studying the 
Vedas in solitude. 


18. O king, the whole forest was covered 
with the effulgence of his asceticism. He 
seemed to have illuminated the whole region 
like the sun. 

19. Seeing his that severe, excellent and 
wonderful asceticism, we alighted in that re¬ 
gion, wishing to disturb his asceticism. 

20. O descendant of Bharata, myself, 
Sauravi, Samichi, Vaduvuda and Lata all 
came to that Brahmana at the same time. 

21. O hero, we sang, we laughed, we 
tried to tempt the Branmana in various 
ways, but he did not set his mind on us even 
for a moment. 

22. O best of the Kshatriyas, his mind, 
being fixed on the meditation of the pure, the 
greatly effulgent (Brahmana), did not suffer 
nis heart to waver. Angrily looking at us, 
he cursed us saying, “Becoming crocodiles, 
live in water for one hundred years.” 


thus ends the two hundred and eighteenth 
chapter, the rescue of the crocodiles , in the 
Arjuna Vanavasha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXIX- 

((ARYUNA VANAVASHA PARVA) 
— Continued . 

Barga said 

x. O best of the Bharata race, we were 
all greatly distressed. We sought the pro¬ 
tection of that ascetic of undeviating vows. 

2. (We said), “O Brahmana, intoxicat¬ 
ed with beauty and youth, and madden¬ 
ed by the god of love, we have acted very 
improperly,—you should pardon us. 



AD! PARVA. 


293 


3. It was enough death to us that we had 
at all come here to tempt such an ascetic 
of controlled soul as you are. 

4. The virtuous men consider that women 
are created as non-slayable, therefore you 
should not kill us. Grow yourself in virtue. 

5. Q virtuous man, it is said that a 
Brahmana has always friendly feelings over 
all creatures. O Rishi of blessedness, let 
this saying of the learned be made true. 

6 . The good man always protects those 
that seek protection at his hands. We 
solicit your protection ; you should therefore 
pardon us/’ 

V&ishampayana said 

7. O hero, having been thus addressed, 
that virtuous-minded Brahmana of good 
deeds, as effulgent as the sun or the Mcon, 
became propitious to them. 

The Brahmana said 

8. The words “hundreds” and “hundred 
thousands” all indicate eternity. The “hun¬ 
dred” used by me should be understood as 
a limited period and not as eternity. 

9. You shall, becoming crocodiles, seize 
and drag men into water. (After the ex¬ 
piration of one hundred years), a best of 
men will drag you all from the water to the 
land. 

10. You will then resume your own real 
forms. 1 have never spoken an untruth 
even in jest. 

11. From that day all those sacred Tir¬ 
thas will be known by the name of Navi- 
Tirthas all over the world. All of them will 
be sacred and sin-cleansing in the eyes of 
the virtuous and the wise. 

Barga said:— 

12. Having saluted that Brahmana with 
reverence and walked round him, we left 
that place in great grief ; and we all came 
away thinking (all the while), 

13. “Where shall we soon meet with that 
man who will give us our own old forms ?” 

14 O descendant of Bharata, as we were 
thinking, at that very moment we met wiih 
the illustrious celestial Rishi Narada. 

 5  O Partha, seeing that celestial Rishi 
of immeasurable effulgence, our hearts were 
filled with joy. Having saluted him with 
reverence we stood before him with faces 
covered with blushes. 

16. He asked us the cause of our sorrow, 
and we told him all. Having heard what 
had happened, he thus spoke to us, 


17. “In the low lands on the coast of 
the southern sea there are five sacred and 
delightful Tirthas ,—go there without delay. 

18. That best of men the pure-souled 
Pandava Dhananiaya (Arjuna) will certain¬ 
ly deliver you from your this distressful 
state.” 

19. O hero, hearing the Rishi's words, 
all of us came here. O sinless one, I have 
been really delivered by you to-day. 

20. But, those others of my friends are 
still within the waters of the other lakes. 
O hero, perform a good work,—deliver them 
all. 

Vaishampayana Baid:— 

21 O king, thereupon that best of the 
Pandavas (Arjuna) of great prowess gladly 
delivered all of them from that curse. 

22. O king, rising from the waters, they 
all regained their old forms, and those 
Apsaras then all looked as they looked 
before. 

23. Making safe those Tirthas and giv¬ 
ing them ( Apsaras) leave to go away, that 
lord (Arjuna) went again to Manipur to see 
Chitrangada once more. 

24. He saw there on the throne Vavru- 
vahana, begotten by him (on Chitrangada). 
Seeing her, O king, the Pandava (Arjuna) 
proceeded towards Gokarna. 

thus ends the two hundred and nineteenth 
Section , Arjuna's Tirtha Visiting , in the 
Arjuna Vanavasha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CCXX. 

(ARYUNA VANAVAHSA PARVA). 

— Continued . 

Vaishampayana said — 

i—2. The immeasurably powerful (Ar¬ 
yuna) then saw one after the other all the 
sacred waters and other holy places that 
were on the shores of the western ocean. 
Seeing them all, he at last came to the 
Provasha. 

3. When the invincible Vivatsa (Arjuna) 
came to the holy and charming Provasha, 
the slayer of Madhu (Krishna) heard of it. 

4—5; Madhava (Krishna) went thereto 
see his friend, the son of Kunti. Krishna 
and the Pandava (Arjuna) met together, 
and they embracing each other, enquired 
after one another’s health. Those two 
friends, who were none else than the Rishis 
Nara and Narayana of old, then both sat 
down together. 



294 


MAHABIIARATA. 


6. Then Vasudeva (Krishna) asked 
Arjuna about his travels, saying, “ O son of 
Pandu, why are you roaming over the earth 
seeing all the Tirthasl ” 

7. Thereupon Arjuna narrated to him 
every thing that had happened. Having 
heard all, the lord of tne Vrishni race 
(Krishna) said, 11 This is what it should be." 

3 . Krishna and the Pandava sported at 
pleasure for some time at the Provasha, and 
they then went to the Raivataka mountain 
to live there for some time. 

9. Before their arrival (at Raivataka), 
that hill at the command of Krishna, was 
adorned by many artificers. Much food was 
also collected there. 

10. Enjoying every thing that was pro¬ 
vided there for him, the Pandava Arjuna 
sat with Vasudeva (Krishna) to see the 
performances of the actors and dancers. 

11. Having dismissed them all with 
proper respect, the high-souled Pandava 
laid himselt down on a well-adorned and 
excellent bed. 

12. When that mighty-armed hero lay on 
that excellent bed, he described to him 
(Krishna) the sacred waters, the lakes, the 
mountains, the rivers, and the forests that he 
had seen. 

13. O lanamejaya, when he was thus 
talking as he lay on the celestial-like bed, 
sleep (slowly) stole on the son of Kunti. 

14. He rose in the morning, awakened 
by the sweet songs and melodious notes ot 
the Vina , by the panegyrics and benedictions 
of the bards. 

15. After he^ had performed the daily 
rites, he was accosted with affection by the 
hero of the Vrishni race (Krishna). Then 
riding on a golden car he set out for 
Dwarka. 

16. O Tanameiaya, Dwarka with its 
streets, gardens and houses was well ador¬ 
ned to give a grand reception to the son of 
Kunti. 

17. The citizens of Dwarka, in order to 
see the son of Kunti, eagerly came to the 
royal (public) streets in hundreds and thou¬ 
sands. 

18. In order to see him hundreds and 
thousands of women and men of the Vrishni, 
the Andhaka and the Bhoja races formed 
into a great crowd. 

19. He was respectfully welcomed by 
all the Bhojas, the Vrishnis and the Andha- 
kas. He in return worshipped all that 
deserved his worship, and received their 
blessings in return. 


20. The hero was accorded the most 
welcome and affectionate reception by all 
the youngmen (of the Yadava race). He 
too again and again embraced those that 
were of his own age. 

21. In the delightful mansion of Krishna, 
adorned with gems and filled with every 
article of enjoyment, he passed many nights 
with Krishna. 

thus ends the two hundred and twen¬ 
tieth Section , Arjuna 1 s arrival at Dwarka , 
in the Arjuna Vanavasha of the Adi Paroa . 


Section CCXXI- 

(SUBHADRA HARANA PARVA). 

Vaishampayana said 

1. O best of kings, a few days after 
a great festival of the Vrishnis and the 
Andhakas was held on the Raivataka hill. 

2. In that mountain-festival of the 
Bhojas, the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, the 
hero gave away much wealth to the thou¬ 
sands of Brahmanas. 

3. O king, the region around the hill 
was adorned with many mansions filled with 
various gems, and they appeared as if they 
are ail Kalpabrikshas (trees giving whatever 
wanted.) 

4. The musicians played in concert all 
the musical instRuruents; the dancers danced 
and the songsters sang. 

5. The effulgent youths of the Vrishni 
race, adorned with ornaments and riding 
on golden cars, looked handsome evory 
where. 

6. Hundreds and thousands of the citizens 
with their wives and attendants went there, 
some on foot and some on excellent cars. 

7. O descendant of Bharata, there roved 
the lord Haladhara (Valadeva), intoxicated 
with wine, accompanied by his wife 
Revati and followed by many Gandharvas 
(musicians) 

8. There was the powerful king of the 
Vrishnis, Ugrasena, accompanied by his one 
thousand wives and followed by the Gan- 
dharvas. 

9. There were the son of Rohini, and 
ever furious in battle Samba. Intoxicated 
with drink, adorned with beautiful garlands, 
and attired in costly robes, they sported 
there like two celestials. 

10. There were Akrura, Sarava, Gada, 
Vabhru, Viduratha, Nishatha, Charudeshna, 
Pritha, Vipratha. 



ADI PARVA. 


95 


11. Satgata, Satyaki, Bhangakara, 
Maharava, Haridikya, Uddhava and any 
mothers whose names are not mentioned. 

12. They were each separately accom¬ 
panied by tneir wives and followed by the 
musicians. They all adorned that festival 
on the Raivataka mountain. 

13. When that wonderful festival of 
great grandure and delight was continuing, 
Vasudeva (Krishna) and Partha (Arjuna) 
went about together. 

14. When thus walking about, they saw 
the beautiful daughter of Basudeva, Subha- 
dra, adorned with ornaments in the midst of 
her companions. 

15. As soon as Arjuna saw her, he was 
struck by (the arrows) of the god of love. 
Seeing that Partha was looking at her with 
absorbed attention, Krishna, 

16. O descendant of Bharata, spoke thus 
to that best of men (Arjuna) with smiles, 
“How is it that the mind of one who roams 
in the forest is thus agitated by desire ? 

17. O Partha, she is my sister and also 
the sister of Sarana. Her name is Subhadra ; 
she is the most beloved daughter of my 
father. If your mind is set upon her, I 
shall then speak to my father.’ 

Arjuna said:— 

18. She is the daughter of Basudeva 
and the sister of Vasudeva (Krishna) ; end¬ 
ued with so much beauty, whom can she 
not fascinate 7 

19. If your this sister, this lady of the 
Vrishni race, become my wife, then certainly 
do I win prosperity in everything. 

20. O Janardana, tell me by what 
means I may obtain her. I shall do any- 
thin; achievable by man (in order to 
obtain her). 

Krishna said:— 

21. O best of men, Saimvar a is the 
marriage form of the Kshatrvas, but, O 
Partha, that is doubtful, as we do not know 
her temper and disposition. 

22. The men learned in the precepts 
of religion say that in the case of heroic 
Kshatriyas, a forcible taking away of a girl 
for the purpose of marriage is also praise¬ 
worthy. 

23. O Arjuna, therefore, carry away this 
my sister by force, for who knows what she 
may not do in a Saimvara 7 

V&uharapayana said:— 

24. Having thus settled everything about 
what should be done, Krishna and Arjuna 
sent some swift messengers to Yudhishthira 


at Indraprastha, informing him <jf every 
thing. That mighty-armed son of Pandu 
(Yudhishthira), as soon as he heard it, gave 
his assent to it. 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
first Section , the assent of Yudhishthira , in 
the Subhadraharana of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXII. 

(SUBHADRA HARANA PARVA)— 
Continued. 

Vauhampayana said:— 

1. O Janamejaya, having received infor¬ 
mation of the assent (of Yudhishthira) and 
learning that the maiden had gone on the 
Raivataka (hill), Dhananjaya (Arjuna), 

2. That best of the Bharata race, obtained 
the assent of Vasudeva (Krishna) and also 
settled in consultation with him all that 
was to be done. 

3—5. That best of men (Arjuna), attired 
in armour and armed with the sword and his 
fingures encased in leather fences, set out as 
if in a hunting excursion on his (Krishna's) 
well-built golden car, adorned with rows of 
small bells and equipped with every kind of 
weapon. The clatter of its wheels resembled 
the roars of clouds ; its splendour was as that 
of a blazing fire ; it struck terror into the 
hearts of all foes ; and the two horses yoked 
with it were named Sugriva and Saivya. 

6. Subhadra, having worshipped that king 
of hills, Raivataka and the celestials, and 
having been blessed by all the B rah no anas, 

7—8. And having walked round the hill, 
was returning towards Dwarka. The son of 
Kunti, struck by the arrows of the god of 
love, suddenly rushed towards that faultless 
featured Subhadra and forcibly took her 
upon his chariot.Thereupon that test of men, 
having seized that lady of sweet-smiles, 
proceeded (in haste) on his golden car lo 
wards his own city (Indraprastha). 

9 Seeing Subhadra thus forcibly carried 
away, her armed attendants all ran crying 
towards the city of Dwarka. 

10. Having arrived all together to that 
(Yadava) court, called Sudharma, they 
represented to the Savapala (the cheaf officer 
of the court), all about the prowess of 
Partha. 

11. Having heard this, the Savapala 
blew his golden decked tRurupet of bud 
blare, calling every one to arms. 

12. Alarmed by that sound, the Bhojas 
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas poured in 



296 


MAHABHARATA. 


from all directionseven those who were 
eating and drinking came leaving their food 
and drink. 

13—14. Like blazing fires taking faggots 
to increase their splendour, those best of 
men, the great car-warriors of the Vrishni 
and the Andhaka races, possessing the 
lusture of the blazing fire, took their seats 
on thousands of golden thrones, covered with 
excellent carpets and adorned with gems 
and corals. 

15. When they were all seated like an 
assembly of celestials, the Savapala with 
his followers narrated all about the conduct 
of Jishnu (Arjuna). 

16. Having heard it, the proud heroes of 
the Vrishni,with their eyes red with wine,rose 
up from their seats, being unable to brook 
the conduct of Partha. 

17—18. Some cried, “ Yoke our cars”, 
some “ Bring our weapons,” some  Bring 
our costly bows and strong armours,” some 
loudly called upon their charioteers to 
yoke tbeir horses adorned with gold to 
their cars. 

19. While their cars, their armours, and 
their standards were being brought, the 
uproars of those heroes became exceedingly 
great. 

20. Then proud and intoxicated with 
wine, Valadeva, who was like the Kailasha 
mountain, adorned with the garlands of wild 
flowers and attired in blue robes, thus spoke 
to all. 

21. ”0 senseless men, what are you doing 
when Janardana (Krishna) is sitting silent ? 
Without knowing what is in his heart, you 
are vainly roaring in wrath. 

22. Let the high-minded (Krishna) speak 
out what he proposes to do. Accomplish 
with all alacrity what he desires to do.” 

23. Having heard these words of Hala- 
yudha (Valadeva) which deserved, to be 
accepted, they all exclaimed,  Excellent,” 
' Excellent.” They then became silent. 

24. Silence have been restored by the 
words of the intelligent Valadeva, they 
again all took their seats in that court. 

25. Then the chastiser of foes Rama 
(Valadeva) thus spoke to Vasudeva 
(Krishna), "O Janardana, why do you not 
speak, why are you silently gazing ? 

26. O Achyuta, it was for your sake 
that Partha had been welcomed and re¬ 
ceived with all honour by us. It appears 
that wretch, that fool, does not deserve our 
welcome and honour. 

27. Is there a man born of a respectable 
family who will break the very plate after 
having dined off it ? 


28. Even if one desires to have such an 
alliance, who is there who desiring happi¬ 
ness will act so rashly remembering the 
services he has received ? 

29. By insulting us and disregarding 
Keshava (Krishna) he has carried away 
Subhadra by force wishing to compass hts 
own death. 

30. He has placed his foot on my head. 
O Govinda, how shall I bear it, (shall I not 
resent it) like a snake trodden by foot ? 

31. I shall alone to-day make the earth 
free of all Kauravas. Never shall 1 put up 
with this insult offered to us by Arjuna.” 

32. Thereupon all the Bhojas, Vrishnis, 
and the Andnakas, assembled there ap¬ 
proved of every thing that Valadeva said, 
and they roared like the sounds of kettle¬ 
dRuru or the clouds. 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
second Section , the wrath of Valadeva, in 
the Subhadraharana of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXHI. 

(H ARANA H ARANA PARVA.) 

Vaishamp&yana said• 

1. When the powerful Vrishnis all began 
to speak in this strain, then Vasudeva (Kri 
stna) spoke these words of deep import and 
true morality. 

Krishna said 

2. Gudakesha (Arjuna) has not insulted 
our family by what he has done. There is 
no doubt he has enhanced our glory. 

3. Partha knows that we are never mer¬ 
cenary. The Pandava (Arjuna) also 
regards a Saimvara as doubtful m its re¬ 
sults. 

4. Who also would approve of accept¬ 
ing a bride in gift as if she were an animal? 
What man again is there on earth who 
would sell his offsprings? 

5. I think the son of Kunti (Arjuna) saw 
these faults in all other methods, 
therefore the Pandava took the maiden 
away by force according to ordinance. 

6. This alliance is very proper. Su¬ 
bhadra is an illustrious girl and so is Partha. 
Thinking all thi9, he has taken her away by 
force. 

7. Who is there that would not desire to 
have Arjuna as a friend ? He is born in 
the race of Bharata and the illustrious 
San tan u, and he is also the son of the daugh¬ 
ter of Kuntibhoja. 



AD! PARVA. 


297 


8—10. I do not see such a man in all the 
worlds, even with Indraand the Rudras, who 
Cin vanquish him in battle except the three- 
eyed deity Siva. His car is well-known ; 
my steeds are now yoked to it. Partha as a 
warrior is also well known, and his lightness 
of hand too is well-known. Who shall be 
equal to him ? Go cheerfully to Dhananjaya; 
stop^him by conciliation and bring him back. 
This is my opinion. 

11. If Partha goes away to his city 
(Indraprastha) by defeating us, our fame 
will be destroyed. But there is no disgrace 
in conciliation. 

12. O king, having heard these words of 
Vasudeva, they did as he directed. Stopped 
by them, the lord Arjuna returned to 
Dwarka, and he was then united with 
Subhadra in marriage. 

13. Having worshipped by the Vrisnis, 
the son of Kunti remained for a year in 
Dwarka, sporting there at pleasure. 

14. The lord (Arjuna) passed the last 
portion of his excile at Pushkara. When 
twelve years were thus complete, he came 
back to Khandavaprastha. 

15. He went to Yudhishthira and wor¬ 
shipped him first; he then worshipped the 
Brahmanas, and at last he went to Draupadi. 

16. Draupadi, out of jealousy, thus spoke 
to that descendant of Kuru, Arjuna, 44 O 
son of Kunti, go there where the daughter 
of the Swatata race is. 

17. 19. A second tie always relaxes the 
first one, however strong it might be. ” 
thus Krishna (Draupadi) lamented in 
various strains, and Dhananjaya (Arjuna) 
comforted her, asking again and again 
her forgiveness. Coming to Subhadra 
attired in red silk, Partha sent her (into the 
inner appartments) dressed in the garb of a 
cow-herd woman. The illustrious lady 
looked handsome even in that dress. 

20. Arriving at that best of houses, that 
wife of a hero, the best of women, the illus¬ 
trious Vadra (Subhadra) of large and redish 
eyes worshipped Pritha. 

21. Out of excessive affection Kunti 
smelt the bead of that maiden of perfectly 
charming features, and she then pronounc¬ 
ed infinite blessings upon her. 

22. Then that damsel of the face like 
the full moon, Vadra, soon went to Draupadi 
and worshipped her saying, 44 1 am your 
maid. 1 ' 

23. Krishna hastily rose and embraced 
the sister of Madhava; and out of affection 
she then said, 14 Let your husband be without 
a rival/' 


24. 27. Vadra then with a delightful 
heart said to her, 41 Be it so.” O Janamejaya, 
from that time, those great car-warriors, 
the Pandavas, lived happily, and Kunti also 
became very happy. Having heard that 
the best of the Pandavas, Arjuna, had 
reached that excellent city, Indraprastha, 
the lotus-eyed and pure-souled Keshava 
(Krishna) came there with Rama (Valadeva), 

28, And the other heroes and great car- 
warriors of the Vrisni and the Andhaka 
races, and his brothers and sons and 
many other warriors. 

29. That chastiser of foes, Souri, came 
with a large army, and there also came that 
chastiser of foes, that exceedingly liberal, 
greatly intelligent and illustrious comman¬ 
der-in-chief of the Vrisni heroes, Akrura. 

8 There also came) the greatly illustrious 
ddhava, 

30. Who was a man of great soul and 
great intelligence, like a disciple of Vrihaspati 
himself. (There also came) Satyaka and 
Satyaki and Kritavarmana and Satwata, 

31. Pradyumna, Samba, Nishatha and 
Sanku, Chandrasena, the greatly powerful 
Jhilli, Viprutha, the mighty armed Sarana, 
the foremost of all learned men Goda, 

32. These and many other Vrisnis, 
Bhojas and Andhakas came to Indra¬ 
prastha, bringing with them many bridal 
presents. 

33. Hearing that Madhava (Krishna) 
had come, the king Yudhishthira sent the 
twins (Nakula and Sahadeva)]to receive him. 

34. Having been welcomed by them, the 
Vrisni heroes of great prosperity entered 
Khandavaprastha which was well-adorned 
with Rags and standards. 

35. The streets were well-swept and 
watered ; they were adorned with floral 
wreathes and bunches, sprinkled over with 
cooling and fragrant sandal-wood-water. 

36. Every part of the town was full of 
the sweet scent of burning aloes. The 
whole city was full of happy and healthy 
people, and adorned with traders ana 
merchants. 

37—38. That best of men, the mighty- 
armed Keshava (Krishna) with Rama and 
many of the Vrisni, Bhoja and Andhaka 
races entered the town and was worshipped 
by thousands of citizens and Brahmanas. 
He then entered the king’s palace which 
was like the palace of Indra himself. 

39. Yudhishthira received Rama with all 
due ceremonies, and the king embraced 
Keshava with both his arms and smelt his 
head. 


38 



mahabharata. 


29J 


40. Being much pleased with the recep- | 
tion, Govinda (Krishna) worshipped him 
(Yudhishthira) with all humility. He duly 
worshipped that best of men Bhima. 

41. The son of Kunti, Yudhishthira, then 
welcomed with all due ceremonies all the 
other chief men of the Vrisni and the 
Andhaka races. 

42. He worshipped some as his superiors, 
he welcomed others as his equals ; he 
received some with affection and he wors¬ 
hipped others with reverence. 

43. Then the illustrious Hrishikesha 
(Krishna) gave much wealth to the bride¬ 
groom’s party. He gave to the illustrious 
Shubhadra all the bridal presents given to 
her by her relatives. 

44. (He gave the Pandavas) one thou¬ 
sand golden cars adorned with rows of bells, 
to each of which were yoked four steeds 
driven by well-trained charioteers. 

45. Ten thousand well complexioned kine, 
belonging to the country of Mathura and 
yielding much milk, were also presented ( o 
the Pandavas) by Krishna. 

46. Being very much pleased, Janardana 
(Krishna) gave them one thousand moon- 
like white horses with golden harnesses. 

47. (He also gave them) one thousand 
mules of white colour with black man»s, 
all possessing the speed of wind and all well- 
trained. 

48—49. tHe gave them also) one 
thousand damsels of skin perfectly polished, 
all young and virgin, all well-attired and of 
excellent complexion, each wearing one 
hundred pieces of gold round her neck, 
adorned with all ornaments and well-skilled 
in serving at bath and at drink, and in 
every kind of service. 

50. Janardana (Krishna) also gave 
them as an excellent dower of the bride, 
hundreds of thousands of draught horses, 
brought from the country of the Valhikas. 

51. Janardana Gave her (Subhadra) 
as her dowry ten loads of first class gold, 
possessing the splendour of fire ; some por¬ 
tions of it were purified and some portions 
in original state. 

52—54. The weilder of plough as his wea¬ 
pon, the lover of heroism, Karna, gave 
rartha as his nuptial present one thousand 
elephants with secretions flowing in three 
streams from the three parts of their bodies, 
each as Targe as a mountain, each irresistible 
in battle, each decked with coverlets, well 
adorned with ever-ringing bells and other 
golden ornaments, and each equipped with 
e (cellent haudahs on its back. 


55.—56. The large number of gems and 
the large quantity of wealth presented by the 
Jadavas looked like a sea, of w'hich the 
cloths and blankets were the foams, the 
elephants were the aligators and sharks, and 
the flags the floating weeds. This sea, thus 
swelling into large proportions, mingled with 
the ocean of wealth of the Pandavas. It was 
filled to the brim to the great sorrow of all 
their foes. 

57. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira accepted 
all these presents and worshipped all those 
great warriors of the Vrisni and the Andha¬ 
ka races. 

58. Those illustrious heroes of the Kura, 
Vrisni and Andhaka races passed their time 
all in merriment and in pleasure, as do the 
virtuous men in heaven (after their death). 

59. The Kurus and the Vrisnis sported 
there with joyous hearts, often shouting and 
clapping their hands. 

60. .thus passing many days in pleasure, 
and worshipped and entertained by the 
Kurus, the greatly effulgent Vrisni heroes 
then returned to the city of Dwaravati. 

61. The great warriors of the Vrisni 
and the Andhaka races, placing Rama at 
their head and carrying with them all those 
bril liant gems presented to them by the ex¬ 
cellent Kurus, set out (for their own city). 

62. O descendant of Bharata, the high- 
souled Vasudeva (Krishna, however) re¬ 
mained with Arjunain the charming city of 
Indraprastha. 

63. That greatly illustrious hero roamed 
along the banks of the £amuna in search of 
deer. He sported and hunted with Kiriti 
(Arjuna), piercing deer and wild boars with 
his arrows 

64. Then Subhadra, the beloved sister 
of Krishna, gave birth to an illustrious son, 
like Pulama’s daughter (Shachi) giving 
birth to Jayanta (son of Indra). 

65. He was of long arms, broad chest, 
and bull-like eyes ; that chastiser of foes, 
that best of men, that hero, the son of 
Subhadra, was named Abhimanyu. 

66. That best of the Bhirata race, that 
chastiser of foes, that son of Arjuna, was 
called Abhimanyu, because he was fearless 
and wrathful. 

67. That great hero was begotten by 
Dhananiaya on the maiden of the Swatata 
race, like fire produced by rubbing in a 
sacrifice from within the Sami wood. 

68. O descendant of Bharata, on the 
birth of this child, the greatly powerful son o€ 
Kunti, Yudhishthira, gave away to the Brah- 
manas ten thousand kine and many thou¬ 
sand gold coins. 



AD! PARVA. 


69. The child became a favourite of 
Vasudeva from his earliest years, and of his 
father and uncles. He shone like the moon 
beccme and the favourite of all the people. 

70. Krishna performed ail the usual 
rites of infancy on his birth. The child 
began to grow up like the moon in the white 
fortnight 

71. That chastiser of foes learnt from 
Arjuna the science of arms with its four 
branches and ten divisions, both human and 
celestial; and he also became learned in the 
Vedas. 

72—73. That powerful boy (Abhimanyu) 
became equal to his father in counteracting 
the weapons hurled upon him, in great light¬ 
ness of hands, in fleetness of motion, forward 
and backward, and in traversing and wheel¬ 
ing. Seeing his son, the son of Subhadra, 
(so skilful in arms), Dhananjaya became ex¬ 
ceedingly happy. 

74. He possessed the power of crushing 
all his enemies,—he had every auspicious 
mark on his body ; he was invincible in 
battle and as broad shouldered as a bull; he 
had a face like that of a snake, 

75. He was as proud as the lion, he was 
a great bowman and as powerful as a mad 
elephant. His voice was like that of the 
roars of clouds, and his face was like that of 
the full moon. 

76. He was equal to Krishna in bravery, 
m energy, in beauty and in features. Vi- 
vatsu (Arjuna) saw his son as if he was Ma- 
gavata himself. 

77. The auspicious Panchala princess 
also obtained five heroic, excellent, and 
mountain-like sons from the five Pandavas. 

78. —79. Prativindhya was begotten by 
Yudhishthira, Sutasomaby Vrikodara, Sruta- 
karmana by Arjuna, Satanika by Nakula 
and Srutasena by Sahadeva ; they were all 
great car-warriors. The Panchala princess 
gave birth to these five heroes, as Aditi 
gave birth to the Adityas. 

80. The Brahmanas from their fore-know¬ 
ledge said to Yudhishthira, that because 
that son of his would be capable of bearing 
like the Vindhya mountains the weapons of 
the foe, he should be called Prativindhya . 

81. Because the child that Draupadi 
bore to Bhimsena was born after Bhima 
had performed one thousand Soma sacrifices, 
he should be called the great bow-man 
Sutasamm. 

82. Because Arjuna's son was born on 
his return from excile during which he had 
achieved many celebrated feats, that child 
came to be called Srutakarmana , 


m 

83. Nakula’s son was named Satanika 
after a royal sage of that name in the illus¬ 
trious race of Kuru. 

84. And because the son, Draupadi bore 
to Sahadeva, was born under the constella¬ 
tion, called Vahni Daivata , therefore he 
was called after the commander-in-chief of 
the celestial army,— Srutasena . 

85. The sons of Draupadi were all born 
each at the interval of one year. All of 
them became renowned and was much 
attached to one another. 

86. O king, all their rites of infancy and 
childhood according to the ordinance, such 
as Chudaharana and Upanayana, were duly 
performed by Dhaumya. 

87. After having studied the Vedas, 
those princes of excellent behaviour and 
vows learnt from Arjuna the use of all the 
weapons, both celestial and human. 

88 O best of kings, having obtained sons, 
all of whom were celestial-like, all of whom 
possessed broad chests and all of whom 
became great warriors, the Pandavas 
became exceedingly happy. 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
third chrpier, the birth of the Pandu prin¬ 
ces in the Haranaharana of the Adi 
Parva. 


Section ccx Xiv . 

(KHANDAVADAHA PARVA.) 

Yaishampayana said 

1. When at the command of the king, 
Dhritarashtra, and the son of Shantanu, 
(Bhishma), the Pandavas had taken up 
their abode at Indraprastha, they brought 
under their sway many other kings and 
monarchs. 

2. As a soul lives happily depending on 
the body blessed with auspicious marks 
and pious deeds, so all the subjects lived 
most happily, depending on Dharmaraja 
(Yudhishthira.) 

3. O best of the Bharata race, he 
(Yudhishthira) served equally Dharma, Artha 
and Kama, as if each of them was a 
friend as dear to him as his own soul. 

4. It appeared as if the three pursuits, 
Dharma, Artha and Kama, became personi¬ 
fied on earth ; and with them the king shined 
as the fourth (pursuit.) 

5. Having obtained him as their king, 
they obtained a monarch who was devoted to 



3 oo 


mahabharata. 


the study of the Vedas, who was a performer 
of great sacrifices, and who was the pro¬ 
tector of all good works. 

6. (During his reign) Lakshmi became 
stationary and hearts Decame devoted to 
the Supreme Spirit. Vertue itself began 
to grow all over the world. 

7. Surrounded by his four brothers the 
king looked as resplendent as a great 
sacrifice depending upon and assisted by 
the four Vedas. 

8 . Many learned Brahmanas with 
Dhaumya at their head,—each equal to 
Vrihaspati,—waited upon the king, as the 
Eclestials wait upon the Lord of creation. 

9. On account of the excessive affection 
of the people, both their hearts and eyes 
equally took great delight in Dharmaraja 
(Yudhishthira) who was like a full moon 
without a stain. 

10. The people took delight in him, not 
only because he was their king, but because 
they bore for him a great affection. The 
king also did what was agreeable to them. 

11. The sweet-speeched and greatly 
intelligent son of Pritha (Yudhishthira) never 
uttered any thing that was improper, or 
untrue or unbearable or disagreeable. 

12. That greatly powerful and best king 
of the Varata race happily passed his days 
in seeking the good of every body, as if 
every one was his own self. 

13. (His brothers,) the Pandavas brought 
by their great prowers many kings under their 
sway ; they passed their days in happiness, 
having nothing to disturb their peace. 

14. After a few days, Vivatsu (Arjuna) 
thus spoke to Krishna, " O Krishna, the 
summer is come, let us go to the Jamuna . 

15. O Jonardana, O slayer of Madhu, 
if you like, let us sport there with our friends, 
and then return in the evening. 

Krishna said 

16. O son of Kunti, this is also my wish. 
O Partha, let us sport with our friends in 
the waters (of the Jamuna) 

Vaishampayana said:— 

17. O descendant of Bharata, having 
consulted with each other and after receiv¬ 
ing Yudhishthira’s permission, Partha 
(Arjuna) and Govinda (Krishna) in company 
with their friends set out (for the Jamuna) 

18. And arrived at a charming spot, 
fitted for the purpose of pleasure, overgrown 
with numerous tall trees and adorned with 
high mansions and looking like the city of 
lndra, 


19—20. O descendant of Bharata, in these 
houses were collected for the descendants of 
Vrisni and Pritha (Arjuna and Krishna) 
numerous well-flavoured and costly viands, 
drinks and other articles of enjoyments, and 
floral wreathes and various perfumes. The 
party soon entered the inner apartments 
(of the house), adorned with many precious 
gems of pure brilliancy. Entering these 
apparments, every one of them began to 
sport at his pleasure. 

21. The women with beautiful full flips 
and rising breasts with handsome eyes and 
unsteady gait for drink began to sport. 

22. Some sported at their pleasure in the 
woods, some in the waters, and some within 
the houses as directed and commanded by 
Krishna and Partha (Arjuna). 

23. O king, Draupadi | and Subhadra, 
exhilarated with wine, gave away costly 
robes and ornaments to thp women that 
were sporting there. 

24. Some amongst them danced in joy, 
and some began to sing ; some laughed and 
jested and some drank excellent wines. 

25. Some obstructed one another's pro¬ 
gress, some fought with one another and 
some again talked with one another in pri¬ 
vate, and some cut jokes at one another. 

26. Those woods, filled with the char¬ 
ming music of the flute, guitars and dRurus, 
became the scene of prosperity itself. 

27. When such was the state of things 
there, the descendants of Kura and Dasarha 
(Krishna and Arjuna) went to a certain 
charming spot near by. 

28. O king, after having gone these, the 
two illustrious Krishnas, the two subjugators 
of the hostile cities, (Krishna and Arjuna) 
sat themselves down on two very costly 
seats. 

29. Partha and Madhava amused them¬ 
selves there by talking over their past 
achievements, and discoursing on heroism 
and various other topics. 

30. When Vasudeva and Dhananjaya 
were thus happily sitting together (in that 
charming spot), like the twin Aswinas in 
heaven, a certain Brahmana came to them. 

31. He looked like an old Sal tree, his 
complexion was like that of heated gold, 
his beard was bright yellow tinged with 
green, the hight and thickness of bis body 
were in just proportion, 

32. He had matted locks, he was attired 
in rags, he was as effulgent as the mor¬ 
ning sun, his eyes were like lotus-leaves, 
his colour was tawny, and he appeared to be 
blazing in splendour. 


ADI PARVA. 


301 


33. Seeing that foremost of Brahmanas 
blazing with splendour coming towards 
them, Arjuna and Vasudeva hastily rose up 
and stood waiting (to receive command). 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
fourth chapter, the arrival of Agni , in the 
Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva. 

Section CCXXV. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA) Contd . 

Vaish&mpayana said 

1. Thereupon that Brahmana thus spoke 
to Arjuna ana Vasudeva of Satwata race, 
 You two, who are now staying so near the 
Khan da va, are two foremost of men. 

2. I am a voracious Brahmana that eats 
much. O descendants of Vrisni and Pritha, 
I ask you to gratify me by giving me suffi¬ 
cient food.' 

3. Having been thus addressed, Krishna 
and the Pandava (Arjuna) thus spoke to 
him, M Tell us what food will gratify you. 
We shall try to give it to you.” 

4. Having been thus addressed, the illus¬ 
trious Brahmana thus spoke to those two 
heroes who were enquiring what kind of 
food he wanted. 

The Brahmana said 

5. I do not wish to eat ordinary food. 
Know that 1 am Agni (fire). Give me that 
food which suits me. 

6. This Khandava (forest) is ever pro¬ 
tected by Indra. I always fail to consume 
it, because it is ever protected by that illus¬ 
trious god. 

7. There lives (in this forest) his friend 
the Naga Takshaka with his relatives and 
followers. It is for him that the weilder of 
thunder (Indra) protects it. 

8. Many other creatures are also pro¬ 
tected by him (in this forest) for the sake 
of Takshaka. Although I am ever desirous 
of consuming it, I cannot do it for Indra’s 
prowess. 

9. Whenever he sees me blazing up 
fin this forest), he pours upon me waters 
from the clouds. I cannot thus succeed 
to consume it, though very much desirous of 
doing it. 

10. I have now come to you,—you are 
both great experts in arms. I shall be able 
to consume Rhandava with your help. This 
is the food I desire to have from you. 

11. Expert as you are in excellent 
weapons, I pray you to prevent the showers 
of rain from coming down upon me, and to 
prevent also any creatures from escaping 
when I begin to cousume it (the forest ). 


Janamejaya said 

12. Why did the high-souled Agni desire 
to consume the forest of Khandava, abound¬ 
ing in various living creatures and protect¬ 
ed by Indra ? 

When Agni consumed the Khan- 
dava in wrath, there was certainly a grave 
cause for it. . I desire to hear from you all 
this in detail. O Rishi, tell me why the 
Khandava (forest) was consumed (by fire) 
in the days of yore. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

15 O best of men, I shall narrate to 
you the story of the destruction of the Khan¬ 
dava as told by the Rishis in the Puranas. 

16. O king, it has been heard in the 
Puranas that there was a king named Swe- 
taki who was endued with both strength and 
prowess, and who was a rival to indra him¬ 
self. 

17; None has equalled him in sacrifices, 
charity and intelligence. He performed 
five great sacrifices and many other smaller 
ones, in all of which Dhakshinas (presents 
to Brahmanas) were very large. 

18. O king, the heart of that monarch 
was always set upon sacrifices, religious rites 
and gifts of all kinds. 

19. —20. That greatly intelligent king 
performed sacrifices for many years, assisted 
by the Ritwijas till they, becoming weak 
and their eyes afflicted with smoke, left that 
king, wishing never more to assist him at his 
sacrifices. I he king, however, again and 
again asked them to come to him, but on 
account of their sore eyes, they did not 
come. 

.21; Thereupon the king with the per¬ 
mission of. the Ritwijas completed his 
sacrifices with the assistance of other Ritwi¬ 
jas. 

T 22. Some days after, he desired to per¬ 
form another sacrifice which would extend 
fur one hundred years. 

23.—24. But the illustrious king did not 
get any Ritwijas ; the high-souled king 
with his friends and relatives again and 
again courted them by bowing down to 
them, by conciliatory speeches and by the 
gifts of wealth. 

25. But they refused to accomplish the 
purpose of that greatly effulgent (king), 
rhereupon that royal sage thus spoke to them 
in anger, sitting in their own hermitage. 

26. “ O Brahmanas, if I were a fallen 
person, if I were in wanting in service to 

hi, I should then deserve to be abondoned 
y you and other Brahmanas. 



302 


mahabharata. 


27_30. O excellent Brahmanas, as I am 

neither degraded, nor wanting in homage to 
you, you shduld not obstruct the sacrifice 
performed by me and abondon me thus with¬ 
out sufficient reason. O Brahmanas, I seek 
your protection, you should be propitious 
to me. O excellent Brahmanas, if you 
abondon me from enmity alone, I shall go 
to other Brahmanas and I shall ask for their 
assistance at my secrifice. Conciliating them 
with sweet words and speeches, I shall tell 
them what is my business to be done so 
that they may accomplish it.” Having 
said this, the king became silent. 

31. The Brahmanas knew well that they 
could not assist that chastiser of foes at his 
sacrifice ; therefore they pretended to be 
angry with that best of kings, and they said, 

32. " O best of kings, your sacrifices are 
incessant; we have been fatigued by assisting 
you (at your sacrifices). 

33. We are tired in consequence of this 
labour ; therefore, you should give us leave 
(to go away). O sinless one, from your 
loss of judgment only you cannot wait. 

34. GotoRudra (Siva); he will assist 
you at your sacrifice. ” Having heard 
these words of censure and wrath, the king 
Swataki became angry. 

35. Going to the Kailasha mountain, he 
began to worship the God (Siva), observing 
regid vows and performing austere penances 

36—38. Giving up all food, he passed 
many years; he only ate fruits and roots, 
sometimes at the twelveth and sometimes at 
the sixteenth hour of the day. He stood like 
the trunk of a tree. For six months with 
upraised arms and eyes fixed, the king per¬ 
formed the severest penances there (on the 
Kailasha mountain.) 

39. O descendant of Bharata, Sankara 
(Siva) was greatly pleased , and he at last 
appeared before him. He said,  O chas¬ 
tiser of foes, O best of men, I have been 
much pleased with your asceticism. 

40. O king, now ask the boon you desire.” 
Hearing these words of the immeasurably 
effulgen t Rudra (Siva), 

41—42. The royal sage bowed to him 
and thus replied to him, " O illustrious 
one, O chief of the celestials, O god of 
gods, if you are pleased with me, assist 
me then in my sacrifices.” 

43. Having heard these words of the 
king, the deity was pleased and smilingly re¬ 
plied, "We ourselves do not assist at sacri¬ 
fices. 

44. But O king, O chastiser of foes, as 
you have undergone the severest of penan¬ 


ces with the desire of obtaining a boon, I 
shrill assist you at your sacrifice on this 
condition. 

45. O king of k ings, if for full twelve 
years you can incessantly pour libations of 
ghee into the sacrificial fire,—you yourself 
leading all the while the life of a B ram ha - 
ckari ,— 

46. Then, O king, you can obtain me 
for the purpose for which you ask me.” 
Having been thus addressed by Rudra, the 
king Swetaki 

47. Did what he was asked to do by the 
weilder of Sula (Siva). When!twelve years 
were completed, he again came to Moha- 
shwara (Siva). 

48. On seeing the king, and being much 
pleased with him, the creator of the world 
Sankera (Siva) spoke thus to that best of 
monarchs, Swetaki. 

49. " O best of kings, I have been 
pleased with your (great) act. O chastiser of 
foes, the duty of assisting at sacrifies be¬ 
longs to the Brahmanas. 

50. O chastiser of foes, therefore, I shall 
not myself assist you at your sacrifice to-day. 
There is on earth a greatly illustrious and 
best of Brahmanas who is a portion of my 
own self. 

51. He is known by the name of Dur- 
vasha. He will assist you at your sacrifice. 
He is endued with ascetic powers, he will 
assist you. therefore, let every preparation 
be made (by you).” 

52. Having heard these words of Rudra, 
the king returned to his capital and began 
to collect all that were necessary for his 
sacrifice, 

53. When every thing had been collected, 
the king again appeared before Sankara 
and said, " Every necesary thing has been 
collected, 

54. And through your grace all my 
preparations are ready O god of gods, let 
me, therefore, be installed in the sacrifice 
to-morrow.” Having heard these words of 
the illustrious king, 

55. Rudra summoned Durvasa and 
spoke to him thus, "O best of Brahmanas, 
this is the high-souled king Swetaki. 

56. O chief of Brahmanas, assist him at 
his sacrifice at my command.” The Rishi 
said to Rudra, " Be it so.” 

57. Thereupon the sacrifice for which the 
illustrious king made preparations was 
performed according to the ordinance, at the 
proper season ana a with large amount of 
1 )hahshift as , 



ADI PARVA. 


303 


58. When that sacrifice of that illustrious 
king came to an end, all the other priests 
that assisted at it went away with the per¬ 
mission of Durvasa. 

59. AH other greatly effulgent Sada - 
syas also, who had been installed in that 
sacrifice, went away. O king, then that 
high souled (royal sage) entered his own 
palace. 

60. Thereupon the illustrious Agni be¬ 
came pale, (because he drank a very large 
quantity of ghee in that sacrifice). He could 
not shine as before. 

61. Seeing himself pale, Agni went to 
the sacred abode of Brahma ever adored 
by all. 

62. Coming to Brahma seated (on his 
throne), he spoke to him thus, “ O lord of 
the universe, 1 am reduced both in splen¬ 
dour and strength. 

63. I desire to regain my own permanent 
nature through your grace “ Having heard 
these words of Agni, the illustrious creator 
of all the worlds, 

64. Smilingly thus spoke to Agni, “You 
have drunk continuously for twelve years a 
very large quantity of ghee poured into your 
mouth, 

65. O exalted Deity, it is for this you 
have been affected with illness. O Agni, 
you have, therefore, suddenly lost both your 
splendour and strength. 

66. —67. O Agni, do not grieve for it. 
You shall soon regain your own nature. I 
shall despel your this malady. O Agni, 
the abode of the enemies of the celestials, 
the fearful forest of Khandava, which at 
the request of the celestials you reduced 
to washes in the days of yore has again 
been filled with numerous creatures. 

68. When you will eat the fat of all those 
creatures (now living in the Khandava), 
you will then regain your own nature. Go 
there soon to consume it with all its living 
creatures. You will then certainly be cured 
of your malady. ” 

69. Having heard these words that were 
uttered by the Supreme Deity, Agni pro¬ 
ceeded with great speed (towards that great 
forest). 

70. Arriving at the fearful Khandava 
forest in fuU vigour, he suddenly blamed up 
with the help of the wind. 

71. Seeing the Khandava on fire, the 
dwellers of that forest made great efforts 
to extinguish it. 

72. Hundreds and thousands of ele¬ 
phants speedily brought|water in their trunks, 
and they scattered it over the fire in great 
wrath. 


73. Many-headed snakes, becoming mad 
with anger, speedily scattered on the fire 
water from their many hoods. 

74  O best of the Bharata race, they 
and the other creatures that lived in that 
forest soon extinguished the fire by various 
means and efforts. 

75 thus Agni blazed forth again and 
again in the Khandava (forest), but the 
blazing fire was again and again extinguish¬ 
ed by the dwellers of that forest. 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
fifth Section , the defeat of Agni , in the 
Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva. 


Section CCXIV. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA).— Continued , 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. Then Agni in despair and his malady 
(uncured) came to the Grandsire in anger. 

2. He told Brahma all that had happen- 
| ed. The illustrious one, then reflecting for 

a moment, spoke thus to him, 

3. “O sinless one, I see a means by 
which you may consume Khandava today,— 
even before the very sight of the husband 
of Sachi (Indra). 

4. O Vivavasu, the two old deities Nara 
and Narayana have become incarnates in 
the world of men to accomplish the purposes 
of the dwellers of heaven (the celestials). 

5. They are called on earth Vasudeva 
(Krishna) and Arjuna. They are now stay¬ 
ing near the Khandava (forest). 

6. Ask those two (heroes) to help you 
in consuming the Khandava. You wifi then 
be able to consume it, even if it be protected 
by the celestials. 

7. They will certainly prevent the dwell¬ 
ers of the Khandava to escape; and they 
wiU thwart Indra also. I have not the least 
doubt in this. M 

8. —10. Having heard his words, Agni 
speedily came to Krishna and Arjuna. 
What he said to those illustrious pair, I have 
already told you. O best of kings, hearing 
these words of Agni who desired to consume 
the foes of Pandava against the wishes of 
Indra, Vivatsu (Arjuna) said to him these 
words well-suited to the occasion. 

11. “I have.numberless excellent celestial 
weapons with which I can fight even with 
many weilders of thunder (Indra). 

12. But, O illustrious one, 1 have no bow 
suited to the strength of my arms and 



3<>4 


mahabharata. 


capable of bearing the might I put forth in 
battle. 

13. In consequence of the great lightness 
of my hands, I require arrows that will be 
inexhaustible (in the quiver). My car also is 
hardly able to bear the load of arrows that I 
desire to keep by me. 

14. I desire to have (some) celestial 
horses of pure white colour, possessing the 
speed of the wind, and (I also desire to have) 
a car, possessing the splendour of the sun ; 
the clatter of its wheels should resemble the 
roars of clouds. 

15. Then there is no weapon suited to 
Krishna’s prowess. He requires weapon 
like the one with which Mahadeva (Siva) 
kills Nagas and Pichashas in the battle. 

16. O illustrious one, you should give 
us the means by which we may gain success ; 
and we can prevent Indrafrom pouring rams 
on that extensive forest. 

17. O Agni, we are ready to do what 
Is possible to be done by manliless ; ni 
prowess. O illustrious one, but you should 
give us the proper means. 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
sixth Section the colloquy between Arjuna 
and Agni in the Khandava Doha of the 
Adi Parva . 


chapterCCCXII. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA).— Continued. 

Vawampayana said 

lf —2. Having been thus addressed, the 
illustrious smoke-bannered (deity) Agni re¬ 
collected Varuna, the protector of the world, 
the son of Aditi, and the lord of waters 
having his home in the waters. He too, 
knowing that he was thought of, appeared 
before Agni. 

3. The smoke-bannered deity (Agni) 
with reverence welcomed the lord of the 
waters, the foremost of the Lokapalas , the 
eternal god of gods, and he then thus 
spoke to him, 

4. 11 Give me without delay the bow and 
the quiver, and also the ape-bannered chariot 
whicn were obtained from the king Soma. 

5. Partha will (today> accomplish a great 
deed with the Gandiva (the bow in question) 
and Vasudeva also with the discus. There¬ 
fore, give them both to me today. H 

6—9. Varuna said to Agni, “ I am 
giving.’ He then gave him that jewel of a 
bow,— Gandiva ,—aoow endued with great 
energy. It was a great enhancer of fame and 
achievements, it was incapable of being 


injured by any weapon, it was the chid 
of all weapons and the gem of them all,— 
it was the smiter of hostile armies, and it was 
alone equal to one hundred thousand bow-1; 
it was the enhancer of kingdoms, and it 
was variagated with excellent colorus; it 
was well-adorned and beautiful to look at, 
without a mark of weakness and injury 
a iy where, and it was always worshipped both 
by the celestials and the Gandharvas. 

10—11. He also gave him a chariot filled 
with celestial weapons, and having a large 
ape as its standard. Yoked to that chariot 
were steeds as white as the silver or the 
fleecy clouds,—they were born in the regions 
of the Gandharvas, and they were all adorn¬ 
ed with golden harness. They had the 
speed of tne wind or the mind. The chariot 
was equipped with every instRuruents of war, 
and was incapable of being vanquished by 
the celestials or the Asuras. 

12.—13. Its splendour was very great, and 
the sound of its wheels werej tremendous; 
it delighted the heart of every creature that 
looked at it. It was created by Prajapati 
after severe ascetic meditation. It was as 
effulgent as the sun, and its spledour was so 
great that none could gaze at it. It was 
that very chariot riding on which the lord 
Soma defeated the Danavas. 

14.—‘i5. Resplendent with beauty, it 
looked like an evening Jckmd reflecting the 
splendour of the sun. It was furnished 
with an excellent flag-staff of golden 
colour and beauty. And there sat upon that 
staff a fierce-looking celestial ape which 
looked like a lion or a tiger. 

16. Stationed on high the ape seemed 
bent upon burning everything it saw. 
There were other creatures also on other 
flags, 

17. Whose roars caused the soldiers of 
the enemy’s army to faint away. Then walk¬ 
ing round that excellent car adorned with 
various flags and banners, and bowing to the 
celestials, 

18. Arjuna, attired in armour, armed 
with sword, and his fingers incased in 
leather, ascended it as a virtuous man (on a 
celestial car that takes him to heaven). 

19. Taking up that celestial and the best 
of all bows, that which was created by Braxnha 
in days of yore ‘and which was called 
Gandiva t Arjuna became exceedingly glad, 

20 . Bowing down to Agni, the greatly 
powerful hero took up the bow with force, 
and stringed it. 

21. His heart trembled who heard the 
noise that was made while the bow was 
stringed by the mighty Pandava (Arjuna). 



AtH PARVA. 


30J 


Having obtained that chariot and 
bow, and the two inexhaustible quivers, 
the Son of Kunti became exceedingly glad ; 
and he then thought that he was competent to 
assist Agni in the task. 

23. Then (Agni) gave Krishna a discus 
with a piece of iron attached to its centre. 
It was a desirable fiery weapon, and on 
receiving it, he too became competent to 
assist Agni. 

24. Then Agni said, “ O slayer of Madhu 
Krishna, you shall certainly, with the help 
of this weapon, be able to defeat your 
enemies, even if they are not human. 

25—27. O Madhava, with this weapon 
you shall certainly be superior to men and 

f ods, to Rakshashas and Pishachas, to 
)aityas and Nagas. You shall certainly be 
able to kHl all creatures with this weapon. 
Being hurled at your enemy by you in battle, 
it will irresistibly kill the enemy, and it will 
then again come back to your hands/' 

28. Then lord Varuna gave him (Krishna) 
a club,' named Kaumadaki, capable of 
killing every Daityas, and producing a roar 
like that of the thunder. 

29—30. Then Arjuna and Achyuta 
(Krishna) thus spoke to Agni in joy, 41 O 
illustrious one, furnished as we are now 
with great weapons and well conversant 
with their use, and possessed as we are of ! 
cars with flags and flag-staffs, we are now 
able to fight even with all the celestials and 
the Asuras put together, not to speak of the 
weilder of tnunder (Indra) who desires to 
fight for the sake of the Naga Takshak. 

Arjuna said 

31—32. O Agni when the greatly 
powerful Hrishikesha Krishna moves on 
the field of battle with this discus in hand, 
there is nothing in the three worlds which 
he is not able to consume by hurling his 
weapon. Having obtained the bow Gan~ 
diva, and these two inexhaustible quivers, 

I am also ready to vanquish the three 
worlds. 

33. therefore, O lord, blare as much as 
vou like. Surround this large forest with fire. 
We are quite capable of hdping you. 

Vaishampayana said 

34. Having been thus addressed by 
Dasarha (Krishna) and Arjuna, the illus¬ 
trious (Agni) put forth his most energetic 
form, and he then prepared himself to con¬ 
sume that forest. 

35. Having surrounded it from all sides 
with his seven flames, and appearing as 
fearful as he appears at the end of a Yuga, 
he began to consume the Khandava, 

39 


36. O best of the Bharata ratce, having 
surrounded that forest and catching it on alt 
sides, he roared like that of the clouds and 
made every creature within it tremble (with 
fear.) 

37. O descendant of Bharata, that bum 
ing forest looked like the resplendent Meru, 
the king of the mountains, blaring with the 
rays of the sun falling on it. 

thus ends the tivv hundred and twenty 
seventh chapter^the burning of the Khanda+ 
vd) in the Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXVI1I. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA)- 
Continued . 

Vaishampayana said 

1. Then those two foremost of tar war¬ 
riors (Krishna and Arjuna), riding on their 
cars and placing themselves each on one 
side of the burlng forest began a great 
slaughter of all creatures. 

2. Wherever and whenever they saw 
any creature, any dweller of the Khandava, 
escaping from the fire, those two great 
heroes immediately shot it down. 

3. Their cars moved so fast round the 
forest that the creatures dwelling in it saw 
not the smallest space between the two 
rushing cars (so that they might escape by 
that way). Those two excellent cars seemed 
to be one car, and those two heroes also 
seemed as if they were one man. 

4. When the Khandava was on fire, 
hundreds and thousands of living creatures, 
uttering fearful yells, ran in all directions. 

5. Some had their limbs burnt, some 
were scorched with the excessive heat, some 
had their eyes burst out, some were withered 
away, and some ran about in fear. 

6. Some died calmly within the forest 
clasping their children and some their 
parents and brothers ; they were unable to 
abandon those that were dear to them 
out of excessive affection. 

7. Many rose high upwards, biting their 
nether lips,—but they soon again fell below 
whirling into the blaring fire . 

8. Some were seen rolling on the ground 
with their wings, eyes and feet schofched 
and burnt. They were soon after found 
to be dead. 

9. The tanks and the ponds that lay within 
that forest were heated with the fire and 
they began to boil. The fishes and tortoises 
that were in their waters were all WQ 0 'i 0 
perish. 



MAHABHARATA' 


306 

10. In that great massacre of creatures 
in that forest, the burning bodies of various 
animats looked as if Agm had assumed so 
many forms. 

11. The birds that took to their wings to 
escape from that fire were soon peirced by 
Arjuna’s arrows; and being cut down to pie¬ 
ces, they again fell into the burning fire. 

12. Being pierced by Arjuna’s arrows 
the flying birds again fell into the Khandava 
with great speed and uttering loud cries. 

13. Being pierced by the arrows, the 
dwellers of that forest began to cry, and 
the noise they made was like the fear¬ 
ful noise that rose at the churning of the 
ocean. 

14. The great flame of the blazing fire 
rose to the sky and created a great anxiety 
in the minds of the dwellers of heavens the 
Devas 

15. Thereupon all the illustrious celes¬ 
tials went in a body to their .chief of one 
hundred sacrifices and one thousands eyes, 
the grinder of the Asuras, Indra. 

The celestials said 

16. O lord of the immortals, why does 
Agni bum all the creatures below ? Has 
the time for the destruction of the world 
come ? 

Vaishampayana said 

17. Having heard this, and himself seeing 
what Agni was doing, the slayer of Vitra 
(Indra) set out to save the creatures from 
the fire. 

18. The lord of the celestials, Vasava 
soon covered the sky with masses of clouds 
of various kinds; he then began to pour 
rain. 

19. As soon as commanded by the king 
of the celestials, those hundreds and thou¬ 
sands of clouds began to shower on the 
Khandava forest in as thick drops as the 
flag-staffs of war-chariots. 

20. But the showers were all dried up 
.even in the sky by the heat of the fire ; ana 
they could not reach the fire below. 

ai. The slayer of Nemuchi (Indra) 
becoming very angry with Agni, again col¬ 
lected many more masses of clouds and 
made them shower a heavy down-pour. 

2a. Then the flames faught with that 
heavy shower and those masses of clouds 
overhead. The forest, being filled with 
•smoke and lightnings, became fearful to 
. look at. 

• thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
ilUh Section t the wrath of Indra , in the 
Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXIX. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA)— 
Continued . 

Vaishampayana said:— 

1. The son of Pandu, Vivatsu (Arjuna), 
calling his excellent weapons to his help, 
stopped that shower of rain by means of a 
shower of his own. 

2 . The high-souled Pandava covered the 
Khandava forest with innumerable arrows, 
as the atmosphere is filled with a thick fog. 

3. When the sky over the forest was 
thus covered with the arrows of Sabya- 
sachi (Arjuna), not a single creature could 
escape (from that forest). 

4. The greatly powerful king of the 
Nagas Takshaka, was not there. When 
the forest was on fire, he was absent in 
Kurukshetra where he had gone. 

5. But the powerful son of Takshaka, 
named Ashwasena, was there (in the forest); 
and he made great efforts to escape from 
the fire. 

6. Confined by Arjuna’s arrows, he 
could not succeed to come out (of the for¬ 
est), but the snake lady, his mother, deter¬ 
mined to save his life. 

7. She first swallowed his head, and 
then she began tu swallow his tail ; 
in that state she then attempted to save 
her son and rose to the sky. 

8. -9. As soon as the Pandava (Arjuna) 
saw her escaping, he cut off her head by 
means of sharp arrows, but the husband erf 
Sachi, the weilaer of thunder, Indra, saw all 
this ; and he resolved to save the son of his 
friend. He raised a violent wind and de¬ 
prived Arjuna of his consciousness. In 
the meantime Ashwasena succeeded in 
effecting his escape. 

10. Having seen this fearful delusion, and 
having been deceived by the Nagas, the 
Pandava cut down all creatures into two, 
three or more pieces. 

11. Vivatsu (Arjuna) cursed in anger 
the Naga that had so decietfully escaped ; 
so did VaSudeva (Krishna) and Agni. They 
said, • Never shall you be able to win fame 
or position." 

12. Then remembering the deception 
practised on him, Jishnu (Arjuna) became 
very much angry, and covering the sky with 
a cloud of arrows, he saught to fight with 
the god of thousand eyes (Indra). 

13. Seeing Arjuna in wrath, the king 
of the celestials also sought to fight with 
him. He hurled his very fearful weapons 
and covered whole of the sky. 



ADI PAKVA. 


307 


" 14. Then greatly roaring winds, agitat¬ 
ing all the oceans, gathered together masses 
af clouds charged with torrents of rains. 

15. Thereupon those clouds, charged with 
tVrunder-rattle, vomited thunder and flashes 
of lightnings; but to dispel them Arjuna 
hurled au excellent weapon, 

16—17. Named Vayava (wind weapon) 
with proper Mantras . In a moment it des¬ 
troyed the force and the energy of Indra’s 
thunder, and it dried up the water that was 
in those masses of clouds ; it then destroyed 
the lightnings that played amongst them. 

18. (In a moment) the sky was cleared 
off dust and darkness; delicious and cool 
breeze began to blow, and the sun regained 
its normal state. 

19. Then Agni, sprinkled over with the 
fat that came out of the burning bodies of 
the various creatures, blazed up with 
all his flames and filled the universe with 
his roars. 

20. -—21. O great king, seeing that the forest 
was protected by the two Krishnas, many 
feathery creatures of the Garuda race 
proudly came down from the sky with 
the desire of striking those two heroes 
Krishna and the Pandava (Arjuna) with 
their thunder like strong wings, beaks and 
claws. 

22. Many Nagas also came down upon 
the Pandava (Arjuna), all with faces emit¬ 
ting most virulent poisons. 

23. Partha cut them to pieces by his 
arrows which appeared as if they had been 
steeped in the fire of his wrath. They 
(those birds and snakes) all fell into the 
burning fire below. 

24. Wishing to fight, there also came 
innumerable Asuras, Gandharvas, Yakshas, 
Rakshas and Nagas, all uttering fearful 
yells. 

25 Armed with instRuruents which 
vomited iron balls and bullets from their 
throats, and with machines that propelled 
huge stones and rockets, they rushed 
forward to strike Krishna and Partha. 

26. though they rained aiearful shower 
of weapons, Vivatsu (Arjuna) cut off their 
heads with his sharp arrows. 

27. That slayer of foes, the greatly efful¬ 
gent Krishna, also made a great slaughter 
of the Daityas and the Danavas with his 
discus. 

28. Being struck with the force of his 
discus and pierced with his arrows, many 
immeasurably powerful Asuras became as 
motionless as the waifs and strays thrown on 
the shores by the waves 


29—30. Then the lord of the celestials 
Indra, riding on his white elephant, rushed 
upon the two heroes, and speedily taking 
up his irrisestible thunder-bolt he hurled it 
with great force. The slayer of the Asuras 
(Indra) said to the celestials, “These two 
(Krishna and Arjuna) are already killed.”- 

31. Thereupon seeing the great thunder 
about to be hurled by the great Indra, the 
celestials each took up his own respective 
weapon. 

53. O king, Yama took up his death¬ 
dealing club, the lord of wealth (Kuvera> 
his mace, Varuna his noose and his beautiful 
missiles, 

33. Skanda (Kartikeya) took up his 
weapon Sakti t and he stood as motionless as 
the Meru mountain. The Aswinis stood up 
with their fiery plants in there hands. 

34. Dhatri (creator) stood with his bow 
in hand, and Yaya with a great club; 
the greatly strong Tashtri took up in anger 
a huge mountain. 

35. Surya took up a bright dart, and 
Mrityu a battle axe. Aryamana taking up a 
fearful bludgeon walked about, 

36. Mitra stood there taking up a discus 
as sharp as a razor. O king, Puskara, Vaga 
and Savita 

37. Rushed upon Partha and Krishna 
with bows and swords in their hands. The 
Rudras , the Vasus, the greatly powerful 
Marutas,. 

38—39. The . Vishwadevas, and the 
Sadhyas ,—all blazing in their own efful¬ 
gence,—these and many other celestials, 
armed with various weapons, rushed upor> 
those two best of men, Krishna and Partha, 
with the desire of killing them. Then a 
wonderful phenomenon was seen in that 
great battle. 

40. Mysterious protents appeared, resem¬ 
bling those that appear at tne great disso¬ 
lution. Seeing this, and seeing also Indra. 
with millions of celestials prepared for fight, 

41—42. They (Krishna and Arjuna), 
fearless and invincible in battle, stood calmly 
with their bows in hands. Well-skilled in 
battle those warriors angrily attacked the 
advancing, hosts of the celestials with their 
thunder-like arrows. 

43. They the celestials left the battle 
(field) in fear and sought the protection of. 
Indra. Seeing the celestials routed by. 
Madhava (Krishna) and Arjuna, 

44. The Rishis who were in the sky be-' 
came very much astonished. Indra also, 
seeing that great prowess in the battle, 

45—46. Became exceedingly pleased ; 

and he once more rushed upon them. The' 



MAHABHARATA. 




chastiser of Paka (Indra) then sent down 
a shower of stones to ascertain the power erf 
Sabyasbachi (Arjuna) who could draw his 
bow even with his left hand. But Afjuna 
dispelled (hat shower 

47. Seeeing his shower dispelled (by 
Arjuna), the god of one'thousano sacrifices 
(Indra), the chastiser of Paha, once more 
tent down a thick shower of stones. 

48, The son of the chastiser of Paka 
Arjuna gave great pleasure to his father 
Inara by dispelling that shower also by 
bis greatly swift arrows. 

48, Then Sakra Indra, wishing to kill 
the son of Pandu, tore up with his hands a 
large peak from the Martdara mountain with 
trees and all i he then hurled it against 

him. 

50. But Arjuna soon cut down that 
mountain peak nnto thousand pieces by 
bis swift and fire-mouthed arrows. 

51. Fragments of that mountain peak, 
jn falling through the sky, looked as if the 
un, the moon and the planets loosened 
from their positions fell down on earth. 

52. The fragments of that huge peak 
fell down on that forest, and they killed 
numerous creatures, the dwellers of the 
Khandava. 

thus ends the two hundred and twenty 
ninth Section , the battle between the celes  
Hals and Krishna and Arjuna, in the 
Khandava daha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXX. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA)— 
Continued . 

Vaishsmpayana said 

t—2. The dwellers of the Khandava, 
the Danavas, the Rakshashas, the Nagas, 
the wolves and the bears, the other wild 
animals, the elephant with their temples 
rent, the tigers, the lions with manes, 
hundred? of deer and buffaloes, birds and 
various other creatures, all being frightened 
by the falling stones and afflicted with an¬ 
xiety, began to fly in all directions. 

They saw the fire, and also two 
Krishnas f ready with their weapons, 
frightened at the fearful sounds, they lost 
their power of locomotion, 

4. Seeing the fire burning in innu¬ 
merable places,and seeing also Krishna with 
weapons to shoot them down they all set 
lip a terrible roar. 

5. The whole of the firmament resounded 
With «t lambic ro^r and with also the roar of 


the fire, as when the clouds roaf at the tivff# 
of the great dissolution. 

6. The mighty-armed Krishna (dark} 
Keshava hurled at them for their destruc¬ 
tion his large, fierce and greatly effulgent 
discus 

7. The dwellers of that forest, including 
the Danavas and the Rakshashas, were 
struck by that weapon ; and being cut into 
hundreds of pieces, they fell into the mouth 
of Agni (fire). 

8. Mangled by Krishna's discos, the 
Daityas were covered with fat and blood ? 
and they looked like the evening clouds, 

g. O descendant of Bharata, the Vrishui 
hero Krishna, moving about like Death 
himself, killed again and again thousands of 
birds, the Pishachas, the Nagas and 
other creatures. 

10. The discus, being hurled from 
the hands of Krishna, the slayer of foes 
killed innumerable creatures; and then if 
came back again to bis hand 

11. While he was thus engaged inktil¬ 
ing the Pishachas, the Nagas and the 
Rakshashas, the face and the feature of 
Krishna, the soul of all creatures, became 
fearful to look at. 

12. Now the celestials that came to 
fight and mustered there could not defeat 
Krishna and Arjuna in battle. 

13. When the celestials found that they 
could not extinguish the fire or protect the 
forest from the prowess (of Arjuna and 
Krishna), they retired. 

14. O king, the deity of one hundred 
sacrifices (Indra), seeing the immortals re¬ 
treat (from the battle), became exceedingly 
glad and much praised Keshava (Krishna) 
and Arjuna. 

15. When the celestials retreated, an 
invisible voice thus spoke in a loud and 
deep voice to the deity of one thousand sacri¬ 
fices (Indra), 

16. “ Your friend, that best Of the Nagas, 
Takshaha, has not been slain. Before the 
fire broke out in the Khandava, he had gone 
to Kurukshetra. 

17. O Vasava, know from what I say 
that none can ever defeat in battle Vasudeva 
(Krishna) and Arjuna. 

18. They are Nara and Narayana. These 
two Rishis were formerly heard 01 In heaven. 
You will know what is their prowess and 
energy. 

19. They are invincible in battle ; these 
two best of old Rishis are incapable of ever 
being defeated by any in all the worlds. 



AD! PARVA« 


20. They deserve worship from all 
the celestials, the Asuras, the Jakshas, the 
Rakshashas, the Gandharvas, the human 
beings, the Asuras and the Nagas. 

21. O Vasava, therefore, you should go 
away from this place with all the celestials. 
The destruction of the Khandava (forest) 
has been ordained by fate. ” 

22. Having ascertained these words to be 
true, the lord of the immortals Indra gave 
up his wrath and jealousy and went back to 
heaven. 

23. O king, seeing that illustrious celes¬ 
tial gone away, the dwellers of heaven all 
followed Indra with their soldiers. 

24. When those two heroes, Vasudeva 
and Arjuna, saw the chief of the celestials 
retreat with all the dwellers of heaven, they 
set up a leonine roar. 

25. O king, when Indra had gone away, 
Keshava and Arjuna became exceedingly 
glad. Those two heroes then fearlessly 
assisted Agni to consume that forest. 

26. Having scattered the celestials as 
the wind scatters the cloud, Arjuna killed 
with the showers of arrows numberless 
creatures who dwelt in the Khandava. 

27. Cut off by Sabynsachi's (Arjuna's) 
arrows, not one among those innumerable 
creatures could escape (from that burning 
forest). 

28. Not to speak of fighting with him, 
none amongst the strongest creatures, who 
mustered together to fight, could even look 
at Arjuna with infallible arms. 

29. Sometimes piercing one hundred 
creatures with one arrow, and sometimes 
piercing one creature with one hundred 
arrows, Arjuna (whirled about on his car). 
All creatures fell into the mouth of Agni as 
if struck dead by Death himself. 

30. The creatures found rro ease on the 
banks of the river, or on uneven plains, or in 
Sashanas (crematoriums.) Everywhere they 
were afflicted with great heat. 

3t. Innumerable creatures yelled in pain. 
Elephants, deer, and wolves all wept and 
set up cries of affliction. 

32. At that sound the fishes that lived in 
the waters of the Ganges and the sea, and 
the various classes of Vidadharas , the 
dwellers of that forest became very much 
alarmed. 

33. O mighty-armed hero, not to speak 
of fighting with Arjuna and Krishna dark 
Janarddana, none could even look at them. 

34 (Krishna) killed with his discus all 
the Rakshashas, the Nagas and the Danavas 
who rushed out in crowds. 



35. Those creatures of huge bodies, their 
heads and trunks cut off by the swift dis~ 
cus, deprived of their lives, fell down into 
the burning fire. 

36. Being gratified with a large quan 
tity of flesh, blood and fat, the flames 
rose up to a great height with curling 
wreath of smoke. 

37—38. Agni with fiery and coppery 
eyes and with flaming tongue and large 
mouth, and also with fiery hair on his head, 
drank with the assistance of Krishna and 
Arjuna that nectar-like stream of fat. He 
was filled with great joy, and thus being 
much gratified, he enjoyed much happiness. 

39. Then the slayer of Madhu saw an 
Asura, named Moya suddenly escaping from 
the abode of Takshaka. 

40. Agni, whose charioteer was the wind, 
immediately assuming a body with (fiery) 
matted looks on his head, and roaring like 
the clouds, pursued the Asura with the 
intention of consuming him. 

41. Seeing the Asura, Vasudeva stood 
with his weapon upraised, ready to cut him 
down. Seeing tne discus upraised and 
Agni after him, with the intention of burning 
him, 

42. Moya said “O Arjuna, come soon 
to me and protect me”. Having heard his 
frightened voice, Dhananjaya (Arjuna) ex¬ 
claimed, “Do not fear.” 

43. —44. O descendant of Bharata, the 
reply of Partha seemed to give (Moya) his 
life. As the kind Partha said to Moya not 
to fear, the Dasarha hero (Krishna) did not 
desire to kill him who was the brother of 
Nemuchi. Agni also did not bum him 
down. 

45. Having been protected by Krishna 
and Partha from the attacks of the chastis¬ 
er of Paka (Indra), the greatly intelligent. 
Agni burnt the forest for fifteen days. 

46. In the burning of that forest, he 
(Agni) spared the lives of only six crea¬ 
tures,—(namely) Ashwasena, Moya and 
the four Sarangakas (a kind of feathery 
creatures.) 

thus ends the two hundred and thirtieth 
chapter, the rescue of Moya % in the Khan - 
davadaha of the Adi Parva, 


Section CCXXXI. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA)— 
Continued . 

Janamejaya said 

i. O Brahmana, tell me why Agni did 
not consume the Sarangakas when that forest 
was being burnt ? 



MAHA6HARATA. 


#4 


2. O Brahmana, you have narrated the 
cause of Ashwasena and the Danava Moya 
having been not burnt,—but you have not 
narrated the cause of the Sarartgakas having 
been not burnt, 

3. O Brahmana, the escape of the 
Samagakas seems to be wonderful. Tell us 
why they were not destroyed by Agni in 
that great - conflagration. 

Vaishampayana said 

4. O chastiser of foes, I shall tell you 
all about the reason for which Agni did not 
consume the Sarangakas in that conflagra¬ 
tion. 

5. O king, there was a great Rishi, the 
foremost of all virtuous men, known by the 
name of Mandapala. He was learned in all 
the Shastras and devoted to asceticism and 
rigid vows. 

6. O king, following the footsteps of 
those Rishis who had brought their passion 
under complete .control, he devoted himself 
to study and .virtue, and he became a victor 
over all his senses. 

7. O descendant of Bharata, having 
reached the opposite shore of asceticism 
(gaining success in asceticism), he gave up 
his human body and went to the region of 
the Pitris. But he did not get there the 
ftuits (of his virtuous actions). 

8. He asked the dwellers of heaven 
(celestials) sitting round Dharmaraja (the 
king of the dead) what was the cause of 
his not getting the fruits of his severe asceti¬ 
cism. 

Mandapala said:— 

9. Why have these regions become un¬ 
attainable l?y me? I thought they have 
been acquired by me by my asceticism. 
What have I not done, the fruits of which 
are these regions ? 

to. O dwellers of heaven, tell me why 
these regions are shut against me. I will do 
that which will give me the fruit of my 
asceticism. 

The celestials said:— 

11. O Brahmana, hear of those acts 
aid things for which men are born debtors. 
There is no doubt that men are born debtors 
lor Kriya, religious xites, lox^Brahmachar - 
jaya % study according to the ordinance and 
for progeny. 

Mt. These debts are discharged by 
sacrifices, asceticism and offspring. You are 
an ascetic, you have also performed sacri¬ 
fices, but.you have no offspring. 

13. These regions are shut against you, 
because you have no offspring. therefore, 


beget offspring;—you will then enjoy various 
regions of felicity. 

14. It is said in Smriti , that the son 
rescues the father from the hell, called Putt 
O best of Brahmanas, therefore, try to beget 
children. 

Vaishampayana said:— 

15. Having heard these words of the 
dwellers of heaven, Mandapala thought hour' 
he could obtain the largest number of off¬ 
spring within the shortest period of time. 

1 <5. After reflection, he came to the 
conclusion that the birds alone have the 
greatest power of fecundity. Becoming a 
Sardngaka, hejhad connection,with a female 
Sarangaka, named Jarita. 

17—18. He begot on her four sons who 
were all utterers of the Vedas. Leaving 
these sons with their mother in that forest 
while they were still within the eggs, he 
went to Lapita. O descendant of Bharata, 
when the illustrious Rishi went away to 
Lapita, 

19—20. Jarita, filled with affection for her 
offspring, became very thoughtful. though 
forsaken by their father in that forest ofj 
Khandava, Jarita, out of her affection for 
her children, could not forsake her offspring, 
those infant Rishis still living within the 
eggs. She brought up those children, her¬ 
self following the pursuit proper to her own' 
species. 

21. Sometime after, the Rishi Manda¬ 
pala, while wandering in the forest 
with Lapita, sAw Agni coming towards the 
Khandava to bum it. 

22. Knowing the intention of Agni, and 
remembering also that his children were all 
young,—moved by fear, he gratified Agni, 
the greatly effulgent regent of the universe. 
He did it, wishing to say a word for his 
unfledged offspring. 

Handapala said:— 

23. O Agni, you are the mouthof all the 
worlds, you are the carrier of sacrificial 
Ghee . O purifier, you move invisibly in the 
body of every creature. 

24. The learned have said that you are 
a unit, and again you possess triple nature. 
The wise perform tneir sacrifices before you. 
and they consider you as having eight 
(mouths). 

25. The great Rishis say that this uni¬ 
verse is erected by you. O eater of the 
sacrificial Ghee t this whole universe will be 
destroyed in a single day if you were not 
present in it. 



AD! PARVA. 311 


26. Bowing down to you, the Bmmha- 
nas, accompained by their wives and chil¬ 
dren, go to the eternal regions acquired by 
them by their own (good) deeds. 

27. O Agni, the learned say that you are 
the clouds charged with lightnings. The 
flames put forth by you consume every 
creature (on earth). 

28. O effulgent deity, this universe is 
created by you. The Vedas are your words ; 
all creatures, mobile and immobile, depend 
upon you. 

29. Water primarily depends upon you, 
whole universe also depends upon you. All 
offerings of sacrificial Ghee and all libations 
of food offered to the Pitris have also been 
established in you. 

30. O deity, you are the consumer, you 
are the creator, you are Vrihaspati himself. 
You are Surya, you are Soma and you are 
Vayu. 

Vaishampayana said 

31. O king, thus praised by Mandapala, 
Agni was much pleased with that immea¬ 
surably effulgent Rishi. 

32. He thus spoke to him with a delightful 
heart, " What good can I do to you ?” 
Thereupon Mandapala with joined hands 
said to the carrier of sacrificial Ghee fire, 
M When you will bum the Khandava, spare 
my sons/ 

33. The illustrious carrier of the sacri¬ 
ficial Ghee Agni promised it by saying 
” Be it so.' And then at that very moment, 
he blazed up with the intention of burning 
the Khandava. 

thus ends the two hundred and thirty 
first Section , the history of Sorangakas , in 
the Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXXII. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA)— 
Continued. 

Vaishampayana said =— 

1. When the fire blazed up, the Saranga - 
kas became very much distressed. Afflict¬ 
ed with anxiety, they did not find any rneans 
of escape. 

2. -.Their ascetic mother Jarita, full of 
grief and sorrow, seeing that her sons were 
too young to escape, wept and lamented in 
grief. 

Jarita said 

3. Alas, the terrible fire, the enhancer of 
my misery, is coming towards us, illumi¬ 


nating the whole universe and burning the 
forest. 

4. I am filled with sorrow for the sake of 
these infants with immature understand¬ 
ing and without feathers and feet, who 
are the sole refuge of our deceased ances¬ 
tors. 

5. The fire is rushing towards us, lick¬ 
ing with its tongue the tallest trees and 
spreading fear all around. My unfledged 
children are incapable of effecting their 
escape. 

6. I myself am incapable of escaping 
—specially taking all these (my children) 
with me. I am incapable of abandoning 
them ; my heart is distressed for their sake, 

7. Whom amongst my sons shall I leave 
behind, and whom shall I carry with me ? 
What should I do which is consistent with 
duty? b my infant sons, what is your 
opinion ? 

8. Even after good deal of reflection, I 
do not see any way of escape for you. I 
shall now cover you with my wings and die 
with you. 

9—10. Your cruel father went away 
saying, 11 O Jarita, my race will depend on 
this Jaritari, because he is the eldest of my 
sons. My second son Sarisrikka will 
beget offsprings for the spread of my fore¬ 
father’s race ; my third son Stamvamitra 
will be devoted to asceticism; and my 
youngest son Drona will be the foremost 
of all the learned men in the Vedas.” 

11. Now this great calamity has be¬ 
fallen on us,—whom shall I take with me ? 
I am deprived of my judgment. What 
should 1 do consistent with duty? By 
exercising my judgement, l do not find any 
means of escape for my children from this 
fire. 

Vaishampayana said 

12. The young Sarangakas thus spoke to 
their mother who was thus lamenting,  4 0 
mother, giving up all affection for us, go to 
the place where there is no fire. 

13. If we are killed, you might have 
other children born to you, but, O mother, if 
you are killed, we shall have no children in 
our race. 

14. O mother, taking into your con¬ 
sideration both these two calamities, the 
time has come for you to do that which will 
be for the good of our race. 

15. Do not perform anything out of 
affection for your children. If you are 
saved, our father who is desirous of 
acquiring regions of felicity will have his 
wishes fulfilled. 



mahabharata. 


$ta 

Jarita said 

16. There is a hole here in the ground 
near to this tree enter this hole without any 
delay ; you shall then have no.fear from fire. 

17. O children, when you will enter it, 
I shall then cover its mouth with dust. This 
is the only means that I see for your escape 
from this blazing fire. 

18. When the fire will be out, I shall 
then come back here to remove the ashes. 
If you want to escape from the fire, follow 
my advice. 

The Sarangakas said:— 

IQ. We are but so many balls of flesh 
Without having our feathers. If we enter 
the hole, there is no doubt the carnivorous 
mouse will destroy us all. Seeing this fear 
before us, we cannot enter the hole. 

20. We do npt know how we may 
escape from the fire, or from the mouse. 
We do not see how our father's act of pro¬ 
creation may not be in vain, and how our 
mother may be saved. 

21. If we enter the hole, the mouse will 
kiH us. If we remain where we are, the 
sky-ranger Agni will destroy us. Taking 
both the (two) calamities into our considera¬ 
tion, (we think) death from the fire is pre¬ 
ferable to the death by being eaten up. 

22. To be eaten up by the mouse in the 
hole is a most ignoble death. But des¬ 
truction of the body by fire is praised by the 
wise. 

thus ends the two hundred and thirty 
second Section , the lamentation of Jarita, 
in the Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXXIII. 

(KHANDAVADAHA PARVA)— Contd, 

Jarita said 

1. The little mouse that came out of this 
hole was seized by a hawk with its claws, and 
it has been carried away. therefore, you 
may enter it without any fear. 

The Sarangakas said 

2. We are not at all certain whether 
that mouse has been carried away by the 
hawk. There may be other mice living 
there. We have every fear from them. 

3. There is every chance that the fire 
will not reach us in this place, for it may be 
carried away in some other direction by the 
vrind. There is no doubt, however, that if we 
enter the hole, we shall be killed by the 
dwellers of the hole. 


4. If we remain where we are, death is 
uncertain. O mother, a position in which 
death is uncertain is better than one in 
which it is certain. therefore, it is your 
duty to escape, for if you live, you may 
have other children as good as ourselves. 

Jarita said 

5—6. O children, I myself saw the great 
hawk, that best of birds, swoop down with 
great speed and fly away with the mouse 
from the hole. I quickly followed the 
bird and I pronounced blessings upon him 
for his carrying away the mouse from the 
hole, saying, 

7. 0 king of hawks, as you are flying 
away with our enemy, the mouse, in your 
claws, may you live in heaven with a golden 
body, and having not a single foe. 

8—9. When the hawk devoured the 
mouse, l then obtained his leave and return¬ 
ed to this place. O children, enter this 
hole with all confidence, you have nothing 
to fear. I myself has seen the mouse 
carried away by the illustrious hawk. 

The Sarangakas said 

10. O mother, we do not know whether 
the mouse has been really carried away by 
the hawk. We cannot enter the hole in 
the ground without knowing it. 

The Jarita said 

11. I know to a certainty that the 
mouse has been carried away by the hawk. 
therefore, O children, you have nothing to 
fear. Do what I say. 

The Sarangakas said 

12. O mother, we do not mean that you 
are’ trying to dispel our fears with a false 
story. When a person's reason is confused, 
his acts cannot be called his deliberate 
acts. 

13. You have in no way been benefitted 
by us ; you do not know who we are. Why 
do you then try to save us to so much cost 
to yourself ? Who are we to you ? 

14. You are young and handsome 
you are able to search for your hus¬ 
band. O mother, go to your husband, and 
you will obtain excellent sons again. 

15. Let us obtain the higher regions by 
entering the fire. If the fire does not con 
sume us, you can then come back and ob¬ 
tain us. 

Vaishampayana said 

16. Having been thus addressed by 
them, the female bird (Jarita) left them 
(her sons) in the Kandhava; with great 
speed she went to the place where there was 

np fire and where there was safety. 



ADf PARVA. 


T7. Then Agni in haste and with fearful 
flames came to the spot where the sons of 
Mandapala were. 

18- The (young) birds saw the blazing 
fire coming towards them. Then Jaritari 
spoke these wards in the hearing ot Agni. 

thus ends the two hundred and thirty 
third chapter, the history of Sarangakas in 
the Khandavadaha of the Adi Parva. 

Section CCXXXIV. 

(KHANDAVA DAHA PARVA>-Co»^. 

Jaritari said 

1. The intelligent men always remain 
wakeful in view of death. When the house 
of death approaches, he feels no pangs. 

2. But a man with perplexed soul who 
does not remain wakeful (in view of death) 
feels the pangs of death when the hours of 
death come. He never gets salvation. 

Sarisrikka said 

3. You are patient and intelligent. The 
time has come when our fives are in danger. 
There is no doubt one only amongst many 
becomes wise and brave. 

Stamvauritra said 

The elder brother is cafied the protector, 
ft is the eldest brother who rescues (the 
younger brothers) from danger. If the 
eldest fails to rescue them, what can the 
younger brothers do ? 

Drona said.:— 

5. The cruel deity of fire with seven 
tongues and the seven mouths is coming 
towards our abode with all speed, blazing 
forth in his great splendour ami licking up 
every thing on his way. 

Vaishampay an& said 

6. Having thus addressed one another, 
the sons of Mandapala then each with rever¬ 
ence uttered an eulogistic hymn to Agni. 
O king, listen to them as l recite. 

Jaritari said 

7- O fire, you are the soul of our body; 
you are the body of the earth's visitation. O 
Sukra, you are the progenitor of the water, 
and the water is your progenitor as well. 

8. O effulgent deity, your flame like the 
rays of the sun exists above, below, behind 
and on every side. 

Sarisrikka said 

9 - O smoke-bannered deity, we cannot 
see our mother; we know not our father, 

Our feathers have not grown as yet. We 
have no one except you who can protect us. 
We are infants,—therefore, O Agni, protect 
us. 

10. O Agni, we are in (great) distress. 
Protect us with your auspicious form and 
with your seven flames. We pray for your 
protection. 

11. O deity, O carrier of the (sacrificial) 
Ghee , O Agni, you are the giver of heat, 
you alone give heat to the rays of the sun. 
We are young,—we are Rishis—protect us ; 
and be pleased to go from this place by 
some other way. 

Stamvamitra said 

if. O Agni, you are every thing. The 
whole universe is established in you. You 
uphold every creature, and you support the 
worlds. 

13. O Agni, you are the carrier of 
(sacrificial) Ghee , you are the great (sacri¬ 
ficial) Ghee itself. The wise know you to be 
One and (at the same time) Many. 

14. O carrier of (sacrificial) Ghee (Agni )r 
you create the three worlds and you again 
destroy thenv when the time comes for their 
destruction by swelling (your body to a fearful dimension). 
You are the progenerating 
mother of the whole universe ; you are the 
essence also in which, the universe desolves. 

Drona said - 

15. O ford of the universe, growing im 
strength and remaining within their bodies,, 
you cause- to be digested the food that 
creatures eat. Every tiling is established in 
you 

16. O Sukra,  deity from whose mouth, 
the Vedhs have sprung,— in» the form of 
the sun you suck up the waters of the earth, 
and every liquid juice that earth yields. You 
then again in proper time and in proper 
season give them back in the form of rains; 
and you thus cause every thing to grow. 

17. O Sukra, these plants and creepers 
with green leaves have all sprung through 
you. These tanks and ponds, and the ever- 
blessed great ocean also,, have all sprung, 
from you. 

18. O deity of fearfur rays, this ouc 
(mortal) body depends on Varuna (the god 
of waters). We are incapable of bearing your 
heat. therefore,. (O deity) be our Messed 
protector. Da not destroy us today. 

19. O Agni of copper-coloured eyes and 
of red neck, O deity whose path is marked 
by black colour, save us as tne ocean saves 
the houses on its banks by going away 
(from this place) by seme other way. 



3M 


MAHABHARATA. 


Vaishampayaua said 

 20. Having been thus addressed by that 
utterer of the Vedas, Drona, the deity from 
whose mouth the Vedas have sprung (Agni), 
being well-pleased and remembering his 
promise to Mandapala, thus spoke. 

Agni said'-— 

21. O Drona yau are a Rishi, what you 
have said is the Vedic truth. I shall do 
your pleasure. You have nothing to fear. 

22—23. I was formerly asked by Manda¬ 
pala to spare his sons when consuming the 
forest. The words lie spoke and your 
speech also, both are entitled to great weight. 
Tell me what l am to do. O excellent 
Brahmana, I have been greatly pleased 
with your blessed hymn. 

Drona said 

24. O Sukra, these cats trouble us 
every day. O fire, consume them with 
their friends and relatives. 

Vaishainpayana said 

25. O Janamejaya, telling them what 
were his intentions, Agni then accomplished 
all that the Sarngakas asked him to do. 
Growing in strength, he then again began 
to consume the Khandava. 

Thtes etuis the two hundred and thirty 
fourth Section , the history of Sarngakas, 
in the Khandava Daha of the Adi Parva . 


Section CCXXXV. 

(KHANDAVADAHA PARV A).—Contd. 

Vaishampayaha said 

I. O descendant of Kuru, Mandapala 
became anxious for his sons. Although he 
had spoken of them to the deity of fearful 
rays (Agni), his mind was not in peace. 

2—3. Being very much anxious for his 
sons, he spoke thus to Lapita, “O Lapita, 
my children are not now in possession of 
the power of moving,—how are they (now) ? 
When the fire will grow in strength and 
when the wind will begin to blow with 
violence, my children will be incapable of 
saving themselves. 

4. How shall their ascetic mother be 
able to save them ? She will be afflicted 
with great sorrow when she will find herself 
unable to save them. 

5. She will run about uttering various 
lamentations; for inv sons are incapable 
of fl) ing. 01 rising up in the air. 


6. Alas, how is Jaritari, my son ! How is 
Sarisrikka, how is Stamvamitra and how is 
Drona l Alas, how is also the ascetic lady 
(their helpless mother) V’ 

7. O descendant of Bharata, when the 
Rishi Mandapala was thus lamenting in the 
forest, Lapita, out of jealousy, thus replied 
to him, 

8. “You need have no anxiety for your 
children who, as you have assured me, are 
all greatly effulgent and powerful Rishis. 
They can have no fear from the fire. 

9. Did you not yoursetf in my presence 
speak to Agni on then behalf? Did not 
the illustrious deity promise to save them ? 

10. Being the protector of creatures, he 
(Agni) wilt never falsify his words. You 
have no anxiety in your mind,—your heart is 
never inclined towards your friends. 

11. It is onty by thinking of her,—my 

enemy (Jarita),—that you are so very much 
in anxiety. It is certain that the love you 
bear for her is not equal to that you bear 
for me. # 

12. He who has two parties to divide 
his attention can easily see one of them 
suffer all sorts of pangs. But he can never 
disregard the party next to his heart. 

13. Go to Jarita for whom your heart is 
so very sorrowful. As for myself, I shall 
roam alone,—it would be a fit reward for 
me for having attached myself to a wicked 
man. 

Mandapala said:— 

14. I do not roam over the world with 
such intentions as you believe. It is only 
for begetting offspring that 1 am here. 
But even those that I have is now in 
danger. 

15. He who casts off that which he has for 
the sake of what he may acquire (in ftfturc) 
is a wicked man. The world disregards 
and insults him. As for myself, you are 
at liberty to do what you choose. 

16. This blazing fire that licks up the 
trees produces sorrow in my anxious heart; 
it creates in my mind anticipations of fear. 

Vaishampayana said: — 

17. After Agni has left the place where 
the Sarangakas lived, Jarita, very much 
attached to her sons, came with all speed 
to see how they all were. 

18. She found that all of them had 
escaped from the conflagration, and they 
were all well. Seeing their mother, they too 
began to weep, although they were safe 

1 ;n dwell. 



ADI PARVA. 


35 


19. Seeing them (well), she too shed 
tears again and again. She embraced one 
by one all her weeping children. 

20. O descendant of Bharata, just at that 
very time, Mandapala suddenly arrived 
there, but none of his sons expressed any 
joy on seeing him. 

21. But he spoke to them one after the 
other, and he spoke also to Jarita, but none 
of them said ill or well to him in reply. 

Mandapala said 

22. Who amongst these (my sons) is 
your first born and who is born next to 
him ? And who is the third, and who is the 
youngest ? 

23. I am speaking to you in sorrow ; 
why do you not reply to me ? It is true I 
left you, but I did not get peace where I 
was. 

Jarita said 

24. What business have you with the 
eldest of these (sons), and with him also who 
is the next, and with him also who is the 
third, and with him who is the youngest ? 

25. Go to La pita <>f sweet smiles who is 
endued with beauty and youth, and to whom 
you had gone on seeing me dificient in every¬ 
thing. 

Mandapala said 

26. As regards woman, there is nothing 
that destroys their happiness more in this or 
the next world than a co-wife and a clan¬ 
destine lover. 

27—28. They inflame the fire of hostility 
and cause great anxiety. Even the auspici¬ 
ously blessed and well-behaved Arundhuti, 
ever renowned among all creatures felt 
jealousy against the illustrious and pure 
minded Vashistha, ever devoted to the great¬ 
ly good of his wife. 

29. She insulted even that Rishi, one of 
the seven (great Rishis,—the mind-born 
sons of Brahma). On account of her that 
insulting thought, she has become a little 
star and looks like fire covered with smoke, 
sometimes visible and sometimes invisible, 
as if she is an evil omen. 

30. I had connection with you for off¬ 
spring. I have never wronged you as did not 
the Rishi (Vashistha) of old, but you have 
become jealous as Arundhuti (once was). 

31. Men should never trust women, 
even if they be wedded wives. When 
women become mothers, they do not much 
care to serve their husbands. 


Vaishampayana said 

32. Thereupon all his sons came to 
worship him. And he too giving them all 
assurance spoke kindly towards them 

thus ends the two hundred and thirty 
fifth Section , the history of Sarangakas, in 
the Khundavadaha of the Adi Parva, 


Section CCXXXVI. 
(KHAN DA VAD AH A PRVA)— Contd. 
Mandapala said 

1. 1 spoke to Agni about your safety ; the 
illustrious deity also promised me that he 
would do what I wished. 

2. On account of those words of Agni, 
and also knowing the virtuous character 
of your mother and the great effulgence 
that are in you, I did not come here earlier. 

3. O sons, therefore do not allow anger 
to enter your hearts. You are all Rishis, 
learned in the Vedas. Agni knows you full 
well. 

Vaishampayana said 

4. Having thus assuring his sons, the 
Brahmana Mandapala took with him his wife 
and children ; and leaving that region, he 
went away to some other country. 

5. Having grown in strength, the illus- 
rious deity of fearful rays also consumed the 
Khandava with the asssistance of the two 
Krishnas for the good of the world. 

6. Having drunk many rivers of fat 
and marrow, Agni became highly gratified; 
and he then appeared before Arjuna. 

7. Then Purandara (Indra), surrounded 
by the Marutas, came down from the sky and 
thus spoke to Partha and Keshava. 

8 “You have achieved a feat that even a 
celestial can never do. Ask each of you a 
boon that is not obtainable by man. I am 
very much pleased with you.’ 

9. Partha asked Indra to bestow upon 
him all his weapons. Thereupon the greatly 
effulgent Sakra (Indra) fixed the time to 
bestow them (on Arjuna). He then said, 

10. “ O son of Pandu, when the illus¬ 
trious Mahadeva (Siva) will be pleased with 
you, I shall then give you all my weapons. 

11. O Kuru prince, O Dhananjaya, 
t shall know when that time will come. I 
will bestow upon you for your severe as¬ 
ceticism all my fire and wind-weapons ; you 
will accept them all from me.” 

12. Vasudeva (Krishna) asked that his 
friendship with Arjuna might last for ever. 



316 


MAHABHARATA. 


The chief of the celestiats (Indra) granted 
to the intelligent Krishna the boon he asked. 

13. Having granted these boons to those 
(heroes), and having spoken to Agni, the 
lord of the Marutas, accompanied by the 
celestials, went away to heaven. 

14. Agni also, having burnt that forest 
with all its creatures, animals and birds (con- 
tinnally) for fifteen days, became gratified ; 
and he then extinguished himself. 

15. Having eaten flesh in plentiful quan¬ 
tities and drank fat and blood (to his heart's 
content), he became highly gratified; he 
then thus (spoke to Arjuna and Achyuta 
(Krishna), 


16. “ I have been gratified by you two 

best of men. O heroes, you shall be able to 
go at my command wherever you like." 

17—18. Having been thus addressed by 
the illustrious Agni, Arjuna and Y'asudeva 
(Krishna),—and the Danava Moya also,— 
then roamed there for sometime. They 
then all sat down on the charming banks 
of a river. 

thus ends the two hundred and thirty 
sixth chapter,—the end of Khandavadaha 
—in the Adi Parva . 

